<!-- source: https://nix.dev/tutorials/first-steps -->
<!-- repo: NixOS/nix.dev -->
<!-- auto-generated by scripts/generate-references.sh - DO NOT EDIT MANUALLY -->

# First Steps with Nix

(ad-hoc-envs)=

# Ad hoc shell environments

In a Nix shell environment, you can immediately use any program packaged with Nix, without installing it permanently.

You can also share the command invoking such a shell with others, and it will work on all Linux distributions, WSL, and macOS[^1].

[^1]: Not all packages are supported for both Linux and macOS. Especially support for graphical programs may vary.

## Create a shell environment

Once you {ref}`install Nix <install-nix>`, you can use it to create new *shell environments* with programs that you want to use.

In this section you will run two exotic programs called `cowsay` and `lolcat` that you will probably not have installed on your machine:

```shell-session
$ cowsay no can do
The program ‘cowsay’ is currently not installed.

$ echo no chance | lolcat
The program ‘lolcat’ is currently not installed.
```

Use `nix-shell` with the `-p` (`--packages`) option to specify that we need the `cowsay` and `lolcat` packages:

:::{note}
The first invocation of `nix-shell` for these packages may take a while to download all dependencies.
:::

```shell-session
$ nix-shell -p cowsay lolcat
these 3 derivations will be built:
  /nix/store/zx1j8gchgwzfjn7sr4r8yxb7a0afkjdg-builder.pl.drv
  /nix/store/h9sbaa2k8ivnihw2czhl5b58k0f7fsfh-lolcat-100.0.1.drv
  ...

[nix-shell:~]$
```

Within the Nix shell, you can use the programs provided by these packages:

```shell-session
[nix-shell:~]$ cowsay Hello, Nix! | lolcat
```

Type `exit` or press `CTRL-D` to exit the shell, and the programs won't be available anymore.

```shell-session
[nix-shell:~]$ exit
exit

$ cowsay no more
The program ‘cowsay’ is currently not installed.

$ echo all gone | lolcat
The program ‘lolcat’ is currently not installed.
```

## Running programs once

You can go even faster, by running any program directly:

```console
$ nix-shell -p cowsay --run "cowsay Nix"
```

If the command consists only of the program name, no quotes are needed:

```console
$ nix-shell -p hello --run hello
```

## Search for packages

What can you put in a shell environment?
If you can think of it, there's probably a Nix package of it.

:::{tip}
Enter the program name you want to run in [search.nixos.org](https://search.nixos.org/packages) to find packages that provide it.
:::

For the following example, find the package names for these programs:

- `git`
- `nvim`
- `npm`

In the search results, each item shows the package name, and the details list the available programs.[^2]

[^2]: A package name is not the same as a program name. Many packages provide multiple programs, or no programs at all if they are libraries. Even for packages that provide exactly one program, the package and program name are not necessarily the same.

(run-any-program)=
## Run any combination of programs

Once you have the package name, you can start a shell with that package.
The `-p` (`--packages`) argument can take multiple package names.

Start a Nix shell with the packages providing `git`, `nvim`, and `npm`.
Again, the first invocation may take a while to download all dependencies.

```shell-session
$ nix-shell -p git neovim nodejs
these 9 derivations will be built:
  /nix/store/7gz8jyn99kw4k74bgm4qp6z487l5ap06-packdir-start.drv
  /nix/store/d6fkgxc3b04m85wrhg6j0l5y0ray82l7-packdir-opt.drv
  /nix/store/da6njv7r0zzc2n54n2j54g2a5sbi4a5i-manifest.vim.drv
  /nix/store/zs4jb2ybr4rcyzwq0dagg9rlhlc368h6-builder.pl.drv
  /nix/store/g8sl2xnsshfrz9f39ki94k8p15vp3xd7-vim-pack-dir.drv
  /nix/store/jmxkg8b1psk52awsvfziy9nq6dwmxmjp-luajit-2.1.0-2022-10-04-env.drv
  /nix/store/kn83q8yk6ds74zgyklrjhvv5wkv5wmch-python3-3.10.9-env.drv
  /nix/store/m445wn3vizcgg7syna2cdkkws3kk1gq8-neovim-ruby-env.drv
  /nix/store/r2wa882mw99c311a4my7hcis9lq3kp3v-neovim-0.8.1.drv
these 151 paths will be fetched (186.43 MiB download, 1018.20 MiB unpacked):
  /nix/store/046zxlxhq4srm3ggafkymx794bn1jksc-bzip2-1.0.8
  /nix/store/0p1jxcb7b4p8jhhlf8qnjc4cqwy89460-unibilium-2.1.1
  /nix/store/0q4fpnqmg8liqraj7zidylcyd062f6z0-perl5.36.0-URI-5.05
  ...

[nix-shell:~]$
```

(check-package-version)=
### Check package versions

Check that you have the specific version of these programs provided by Nix, even if you had any of them already installed on your machine.

```shell-session
[nix-shell:~]$ which git
/nix/store/3cdi52xh6lk3h1fb51jkxs3p561p37wg-git-2.38.3/bin/git

[nix-shell:~]$ git --version
git version 2.38.3

[nix-shell:~]$ which nvim
/nix/store/ynskzgkf07lmrrs3cl2kzr9ah487lwab-neovim-0.8.1/bin/nvim

[nix-shell:~]$ nvim --version | head -1
NVIM v0.8.1

[nix-shell:~]$ which npm
/nix/store/q12w83z0i5pi1y0m6am7qmw1r73228sh-nodejs-18.12.1/bin/npm

[nix-shell:~]$ npm --version
8.19.2
```

## Nested shell sessions

If you need an additional program temporarily, you can run a nested Nix shell.
The programs provided by the specified packages will be added to the current environment.

```shell-session
[nix-shell:~]$ nix-shell -p python3
this path will be fetched (11.42 MiB download, 62.64 MiB unpacked):
  /nix/store/pwy30a7siqrkki9r7xd1lksyv9fg4l1r-python3-3.10.11
copying path '/nix/store/pwy30a7siqrkki9r7xd1lksyv9fg4l1r-python3-3.10.11' from 'https://cache.nixos.org'...

[nix-shell:~]$ python --version
Python 3.10.11
```

Exit the shell as usual to return to the previous environment.

(towards-reproducibility)=
## Towards reproducibility

These shell environments are very convenient, but the examples so far are not reproducible yet.
Running these commands on another machine may fetch different versions of packages, depending on when Nix was installed there.

What do we mean by reproducible?
A fully reproducible example would give exactly the same results no matter when or where you run the command.
The environment provided would be identical each time.

The following example creates a fully reproducible environment.
You can run it anywhere, anytime to obtain the exact same version of the `git`.

```shell-session
$ nix-shell -p git --run "git --version" --pure -I nixpkgs=https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/tarball/2a601aafdc5605a5133a2ca506a34a3a73377247
...
git version 2.33.1
```

There are three things going on here:

1. `--run` executes the given [Bash command](https://www.gnu.org/software/bash/manual/bash.html#Shell-Commands) within the environment created by Nix, and exits when it's done.

   You can use this with `nix-shell` whenever you want to quickly run a program you don't have installed on your machine.

2. `--pure` discards most environment variables set on your system when running the shell.

   It means that only the `git` provided by Nix is available inside that shell.
   This is useful for simple one-liners such as in the example.
   While developing, however, you will usually want to have your editor and other tools around.
   Therefore we recommend to omit `--pure` for development environments, and to add it only when the extra isolation is needed.

3. `-I` determines what to use as a source of package declarations.

   Here we provided [a specific Git revision of `nixpkgs`](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/tree/2a601aafdc5605a5133a2ca506a34a3a73377247), leaving no doubt about which version of the packages in that collection will be used.


## References

- [Nix manual: `nix-shell`](https://nix.dev/manual/nix/stable/command-ref/nix-shell) (or run `man nix-shell`)
- [Nix manual: `-I` option](https://nix.dev/manual/nix/stable/command-ref/opt-common.html#opt-I)

## Next steps

- {ref}`reproducible-scripts` – use Nix for reproducible scripts
- {ref}`reading-nix-language` – learn reading the Nix language, which is used to declare packages and configurations
- {ref}`declarative-reproducible-envs` – create reproducible shell environments with a declarative configuration file
- {ref}`pinning-nixpkgs` – learn different ways of specifying exact versions of package sources

If you're done trying out Nix for now, you may want to free up some disk space occupied by the different versions of programs you downloaded by running the examples:

```shell-session
$ nix-collect-garbage
```

---

---
myst:
  html_meta:
    "keywords": "tutorial, declarative, shell, environment, developer, nix, nixpkgs"
---

(declarative-reproducible-envs)=
# Declarative shell environments with `shell.nix`

## Overview

Declarative shell environments allow you to:

- Automatically run bash commands during environment activation
- Automatically set environment variables
- Put the environment definition under version control and reproduce it on other machines

### What will you learn?

In the {ref}`ad-hoc-envs` tutorial, you learned how to imperatively create shell environments using `nix-shell -p`.
This is great when you want to quickly access tools without installing them permanently.
You also learned how to execute that command with a specific Nixpkgs revision using a Git commit as an argument, to recreate the same environment used previously.

In this tutorial we'll take a look at how to create reproducible shell environments with a declarative configuration in a {term}`Nix file`.
This file can be shared with anyone to recreate the same environment on a different machine.

### How long will it take?

30 minutes

### What do you need?

- Familiarity with the Unix shell
- A rudimentary understanding of the [Nix language](reading-nix-language)

## Entering a temporary shell

Suppose we want an environment where `cowsay` and `lolcat` are available.
The simplest possible way to accomplish this is via the `nix-shell -p` command:

```
$ nix-shell -p cowsay lolcat
```

This command works, but there's a number of drawbacks:
- You have to type out `-p cowsay lolcat` every time you enter the shell.
- It doesn't (ergonomically) allow you any further customization of your shell environment.

A better solution is to create our shell environment from a `shell.nix` file.

## A basic `shell.nix` file

Create a file called `shell.nix` with these contents:

{lineno-start=1}
```nix
let
  nixpkgs = fetchTarball "https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/tarball/nixos-24.05";
  pkgs = import nixpkgs { config = {}; overlays = []; };
in

pkgs.mkShellNoCC {
  packages = with pkgs; [
    cowsay
    lolcat
  ];
}
```

::::{dropdown} Detailed explanation
We use a version of [Nixpkgs pinned to a release branch](<ref-pinning-nixpkgs>).
If you followed the [](ad-hoc-envs) tutorial and don't want to download all dependencies again, specify the exact same revision as in the section [](towards-reproducibility):

{lineno-start=1 emphasize-lines="2"}
```nix
let
  nixpkgs = fetchTarball "https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/tarball/2a601aafdc5605a5133a2ca506a34a3a73377247";
  pkgs = import nixpkgs { config = {}; overlays = []; };
in
```

We explicitly set `config` and `overlays` to avoid them being inadvertently overridden by [global configuration](https://nixos.org/manual/nixpkgs/stable/#chap-packageconfig).

`mkShellNoCC` is a function that takes as an argument an attribute set.
Here we give it an attribute `packages` with a list containing two items from the `pkgs` attribute set.

:::{Dropdown} Side note on `mkShell`

`nix-shell` and `mkShell` were originally conceived as a way to construct a shell environment containing the [tools needed to debug package builds](https://nixos.org/manual/nixpkgs/stable/#sec-tools-of-stdenv), such as Make or GCC.
Only later did it become widely used as a general way to make temporary environments for other purposes.
`mkShellNoCC` is a function that produces such an environment, but without a compiler toolchain.

You may encounter examples of `mkShell` or `mkShellNoCC` that add packages to the `buildInputs` or `nativeBuildInputs` attributes instead.
`mkShellNoCC` is a [wrapper around `mkDerivation`](https://nixos.org/manual/nixpkgs/stable/#sec-pkgs-mkShell), so it takes the same arguments as `mkDerivation`, such as `buildInputs` or `nativeBuildInputs`.
The `packages` attribute argument to `mkShellNoCC` is simply an alias for `nativeBuildInputs`.
:::
::::

Enter the environment by running `nix-shell` in the same directory as `shell.nix`:

:::{note}
The first invocation of `nix-shell` on this file may take a while to download all dependencies.
:::

```console
$ nix-shell
[nix-shell]$ cowsay hello | lolcat
```

`nix-shell` by default looks for a file called `shell.nix` in the current directory and builds a shell environment from the Nix expression in this file.
Packages defined in the `packages` attribute will be available in `$PATH`.

## Environment variables

You may want to automatically export certain environment variables when you enter a shell environment.

Set `GREETING` so it can be used in the shell environment:

```diff
 let
   nixpkgs = fetchTarball "https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/tarball/nixos-24.05";
   pkgs = import nixpkgs { config = {}; overlays = []; };
 in

 pkgs.mkShellNoCC {
   packages = with pkgs; [
     cowsay
     lolcat
   ];

+  GREETING = "Hello, Nix!";
 }
```

Any attribute name passed to `mkShellNoCC` that is not reserved otherwise and has a value which can be coerced to a string will end up as an environment variable.

Try it out.
Exit the shell by typing `exit` or pressing `Ctrl`+`D`, then start it again with `nix-shell`.

```console
[nix-shell]$ echo $GREETING
```

:::{warning}
Some variables are protected from being set as described above.

For example, the shell prompt format for most shells is set by the `PS1` environment variable, but `nix-shell` already sets this by default, and will ignore a `PS1` attribute set in the argument.

If you need to override these protected environment variables, use the `shellHook` attribute as described in the next section.
:::

## Startup commands

You may want to run some shell commands before entering the interactive shell environment.
These commands can be placed in the `shellHook` attribute provided to `mkShellNoCC`.

Set `shellHook` to output a colorful greeting:

```diff
 let
   nixpkgs = fetchTarball "https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/tarball/nixos-24.05";
   pkgs = import nixpkgs { config = {}; overlays = []; };
 in

 pkgs.mkShellNoCC {
   packages = with pkgs; [
     cowsay
     lolcat
   ];

   GREETING = "Hello, Nix!";
+
+  shellHook = ''
+    echo $GREETING | cowsay | lolcat
+  '';
 }
```

Try it again.
Exit the shell by typing `exit` or pressing `Ctrl`+`D`, then start it again with `nix-shell` to observe the effect.

## References

- [`mkShell` documentation](https://nixos.org/manual/nixpkgs/stable/#sec-pkgs-mkShell)
- Nixpkgs [shell functions and utilities](https://nixos.org/manual/nixpkgs/stable/#ssec-stdenv-functions) documentation
- [`nix-shell` documentation](https://nix.dev/manual/nix/stable/command-ref/nix-shell)

## Next steps

- [](reading-nix-language)
- [](automatic-direnv)
- [](../../guides/recipes/sharing-dependencies.md)
- [](../../guides/recipes/dependency-management.md)

---

(reproducible-scripts)=

# Reproducible interpreted scripts

In this tutorial, you will learn how to use Nix to create and run reproducible interpreted scripts, also known as [shebang] scripts.

## Requirements

- A working {ref}`Nix installation <install-nix>`
- Familiarity with [Bash]

## A trivial script with non-trivial dependencies

Take the following script, which fetches the content XML of a URL, converts it to JSON, and formats it for better readability:

```bash
#! /bin/bash

curl https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/releases.atom | xml2json | jq .
```

It requires the programs `curl`, `xml2json`, and `jq`.
It also requires the `bash` interpreter.
If any of these dependencies are not present on the system running the script, it will fail partially or altogether.

With Nix, we can declare all dependencies explicitly, and produce a script that will always run on any machine that supports Nix and the required packages taken from Nixpkgs.

## The script

A [shebang] determines which program to use for running an interpreted script.

[Bash]: https://www.gnu.org/software/bash/
[shebang]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shebang_(Unix)

We will use the shebang line `#!/usr/bin/env nix-shell`.

[`env`] is a program available on most modern Unix-like operating systems at the file system path `/usr/bin/env`.
It takes a command name as argument and will run the first executable by that name it finds in the directories listed in the environment variable `$PATH`.

[`env`]: https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799/utilities/env.html

We use [`nix-shell` as a shebang interpreter].
It takes the following parameters relevant for our use case:

- `-i` tells which program to use for interpreting the rest of the file
- `--pure` excludes most environment variables when the script is run
- `-p` lists packages that should be present in the interpreter's environment
- `-I` explicitly sets [the search path] for packages

More details on the options can be found in the [`nix-shell` reference documentation](https://nix.dev/manual/nix/stable/command-ref/nix-shell.html#options).

[`nix-shell` as a shebang interpreter]: https://nix.dev/manual/nix/stable/command-ref/nix-shell.html#use-as-a--interpreter
[the search path]: https://nix.dev/manual/nix/stable/command-ref/opt-common.html#opt-I

Create a file named `nixpkgs-releases.sh` with the following content:

```shell
#!/usr/bin/env nix-shell
#! nix-shell -i bash --pure
#! nix-shell -p bash cacert curl jq python3Packages.xmljson
#! nix-shell -I nixpkgs=https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/archive/2a601aafdc5605a5133a2ca506a34a3a73377247.tar.gz

curl https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/releases.atom | xml2json | jq .
```

The first line is a standard shebang.
The additional shebang lines are a Nix-specific construct:

- With the `-i` option, `bash` is specified as the interpreter for the rest of the file.

- In this case, the `--pure` option is enabled to prevent the script from implicitly using programs that may already exist on the system on which the script is run.

- The `-p` option lists the packages required for the script to run.

  The command `xml2json` is provided by the package `python3Packages.xmljson`, while `bash`, `jq`, and `curl` are provided by packages of the same name.
`cacert` must be present for SSL authentication to work.

  :::{tip}
  Use [search.nixos.org](https://search.nixos.org/packages) to find packages providing the program you need.
  :::

- The parameter of `-I` refers to a specific Git commit of the Nixpkgs repository.

  This ensures that the script will always run with the exact same package versions, everywhere.

Make the script executable:

 ```console
 chmod +x nixpkgs-releases.sh
 ```

Run the script:

```console
./nixpkgs-releases.sh
```

## Next steps

- {ref}`reading-nix-language` to learn about the Nix language, which is used to declare packages and configurations.
- {ref}`declarative-reproducible-envs` to create reproducible shell environments with a declarative configuration file.
- [Garbage Collection](https://nix.dev/manual/nix/stable/package-management/garbage-collection.html) – free up storage used by the programs made available through Nix

---

(pinning-nixpkgs)=

# Towards reproducibility: pinning Nixpkgs

In various Nix examples, you'll often see the following:

```nix
{ pkgs ? import <nixpkgs> {} }:

...
```

:::{note}
`<nixpkgs>` points to the file system path of some revision of {term}`Nixpkgs`.
Find more information on [lookup paths](lookup-path-tutorial) in [](reading-nix-language).
:::

This is a **convenient** way to quickly demonstrate a Nix expression and get it working by importing Nix packages.

However, <ref-search-path>**the resulting Nix expression is not fully reproducible**.

## Pinning packages with URLs inside a Nix expression

To create **fully reproducible** Nix expressions, we can pin an exact version of Nixpkgs.

The simplest way to do this is to fetch the required Nixpkgs version as a tarball specified via the relevant Git commit hash:

```nix
{ pkgs ? import (fetchTarball "https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/archive/06278c77b5d162e62df170fec307e83f1812d94b.tar.gz") {}
}:

...
```

Picking the commit can be done via [status.nixos.org](https://status.nixos.org/),
which lists all the releases and the latest commit that has passed all tests.

When choosing a commit, it is recommended to follow either

- the **latest stable NixOS** release by using a specific version, such as `nixos-21.05`, **or**
- the latest **unstable release** via `nixos-unstable`.

## Next steps

- For more examples and details of the different ways to pin `nixpkgs`, see {ref}`ref-pinning-nixpkgs`.
- [](dependency-management-npins)

---

