<!-- source: https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/stable/#ch-profiles -->
<!-- repo: NixOS/nixpkgs -->
<!-- auto-generated by scripts/generate-references.sh - DO NOT EDIT MANUALLY -->

# NixOS Configuration Profiles

# Profiles {#ch-profiles}

In some cases, it may be desirable to take advantage of commonly-used,
predefined configurations provided by nixpkgs, but different from those
that come as default. This is a role fulfilled by NixOS's Profiles,
which come as files living in `<nixpkgs/nixos/modules/profiles>`. That
is to say, expected usage is to add them to the imports list of your
`/etc/configuration.nix` as such:

```nix
{ imports = [ <nixpkgs/nixos/modules/profiles/profile-name.nix> ]; }
```

Even if some of these profiles seem only useful in the context of
install media, many are actually intended to be used in real installs.

What follows is a brief explanation of the purpose and use-case for each
profile. Detailing each option configured by each one is out of scope.

```{=include=} sections
profiles/all-hardware.section.md
profiles/base.section.md
profiles/clone-config.section.md
profiles/demo.section.md
profiles/docker-container.section.md
profiles/graphical.section.md
profiles/headless.section.md
profiles/installation-device.section.md
profiles/perlless.section.md
profiles/minimal.section.md
profiles/qemu-guest.section.md
```

---

# Minimal {#sec-profile-minimal}

This profile defines a small NixOS configuration. It does not contain any
graphical stuff. It's a very short file that sets the supported locales
to only support the user-selected locale, and
[disables packages' documentation](#opt-documentation.enable).

---

# Base {#sec-profile-base}

Defines the software packages included in the "minimal" installation CD. It
installs several utilities useful in a simple recovery or install media, such
as a text-mode web browser, and tools for manipulating block devices,
networking, hardware diagnostics, and filesystems (with their respective
kernel modules).

---

# Headless {#sec-profile-headless}

Common configuration for headless machines (e.g., Amazon EC2 instances).

Disables [vesa](#opt-boot.vesa), serial consoles,
[emergency mode](#opt-systemd.enableEmergencyMode),
[grub splash images](#opt-boot.loader.grub.splashImage)
and configures the kernel to reboot automatically on panic.

---

# Graphical {#sec-profile-graphical}

Defines a NixOS configuration with the Plasma 6 desktop. It's used by the
graphical installation CD.

It sets [](#opt-services.xserver.enable),
[](#opt-services.displayManager.sddm.enable),
[](#opt-services.desktopManager.plasma6.enable),
and [](#opt-services.libinput.enable) to true. It also
includes glxinfo and firefox in the system packages list.

---

# Demo {#sec-profile-demo}

This profile just enables a `demo` user, with password `demo`, uid `1000`, `wheel` group and
[autologin in the SDDM display manager](#opt-services.displayManager.autoLogin).

---

# All Hardware {#sec-profile-all-hardware}

Enables all hardware supported by NixOS: i.e., all firmware is included, and
all devices from which one may boot are enabled in the initrd. Its primary
use is in the NixOS installation CDs.

The enabled kernel modules include support for SATA and PATA, SCSI
(partially), USB, Firewire (untested), Virtio (QEMU, KVM, etc.), VMware, and
Hyper-V. Additionally, [](#opt-hardware.enableAllFirmware) is
enabled, and the firmware for the ZyDAS ZD1211 chipset is specifically
installed.

---

# Docker Container {#sec-profile-docker-container}

This is the profile from which the Docker images are generated. It prepares a
working system by importing the [Minimal](#sec-profile-minimal) and
[Clone Config](#sec-profile-clone-config) profiles, and
setting appropriate configuration options that are useful inside a container
context, like [](#opt-boot.isContainer).

---

# Clone Config {#sec-profile-clone-config}

This profile is used in installer images. It provides an editable
configuration.nix that imports all the modules that were also used when
creating the image in the first place. As a result it allows users to edit
and rebuild the live-system.

On images where the installation media also becomes an installation target,
copying over `configuration.nix` should be disabled by
setting `installer.cloneConfig` to `false`.
For example, this is done in `sd-image-aarch64-installer.nix`.

---

# Installation Device {#sec-profile-installation-device}

Provides a basic configuration for installation devices like CDs.
This enables redistributable firmware, includes the
[Clone Config profile](#sec-profile-clone-config)
and a copy of the Nixpkgs channel, so `nixos-install`
works out of the box.

Documentation for [Nixpkgs](#opt-documentation.enable)
and [NixOS](#opt-documentation.nixos.enable) are
forcefully enabled (to override the
[Minimal profile](#sec-profile-minimal) preference); the
NixOS manual is shown automatically on TTY 8, udisks is disabled.
Autologin is enabled as `nixos` user, while passwordless
login as both `root` and `nixos` is possible.
Passwordless `sudo` is enabled too.
[NetworkManager](#opt-networking.networkmanager.enable) is
enabled and can be configured interactively with `nmtui`.

It is explained how to login, start the ssh server, and if available,
how to start the display manager.

Several settings are tweaked so that the installer has a better chance of
succeeding under low-memory environments.

---

# QEMU Guest {#sec-profile-qemu-guest}

This profile contains common configuration for virtual machines running under
QEMU (using virtio).

It makes virtio modules available on the initrd and sets the system time from
the hardware clock to work around a bug in qemu-kvm.

---

# Perlless {#sec-perlless}

Render your system completely perlless (i.e. without the perl interpreter). This
includes a mechanism so that your build fails if it contains a Nix store path
that references the string "perl".

---

