<!-- source: https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/stable/#sec-networking -->
<!-- repo: NixOS/nixpkgs -->
<!-- auto-generated by scripts/generate-references.sh - DO NOT EDIT MANUALLY -->

# NixOS Networking

# Networking {#sec-networking}

This section describes how to configure networking components
on your NixOS machine.

```{=include=} sections
network-manager.section.md
ssh.section.md
ipv4-config.section.md
ipv6-config.section.md
firewall.section.md
wireless.section.md
ad-hoc-network-config.section.md
renaming-interfaces.section.md
```
<!-- TODO: OpenVPN, NAT -->

---

# NetworkManager {#sec-networkmanager}

To facilitate network configuration, some desktop environments use
NetworkManager. You can enable NetworkManager by setting:

```nix
{ networking.networkmanager.enable = true; }
```

some desktop managers (e.g., GNOME) enable NetworkManager automatically
for you.

All users that should have permission to change network settings must
belong to the `networkmanager` group:

```nix
{ users.users.alice.extraGroups = [ "networkmanager" ]; }
```

NetworkManager is controlled using either `nmcli` or `nmtui`
(curses-based terminal user interface). See their manual pages for
details on their usage. Some desktop environments (GNOME, KDE) have
their own configuration tools for NetworkManager. On XFCE, there is no
configuration tool for NetworkManager by default: by enabling
[](#opt-programs.nm-applet.enable), the graphical applet will be
installed and will launch automatically when the graphical session is
started.

::: {.note}
`networking.networkmanager` and `networking.wireless` (WPA Supplicant)
can be used together if desired. To do this you need to instruct
NetworkManager to ignore those interfaces like:

```nix
{
  networking.networkmanager.unmanaged = [
    "*"
    "except:type:wwan"
    "except:type:gsm"
  ];
}
```

Refer to the option description for the exact syntax and references to
external documentation.
:::

---

# Secure Shell Access {#sec-ssh}

Secure shell (SSH) access to your machine can be enabled by setting:

```nix
{ services.openssh.enable = true; }
```

By default, root logins using a password are disallowed. They can be
disabled entirely by setting
[](#opt-services.openssh.settings.PermitRootLogin) to `"no"`.

You can declaratively specify authorised public keys for a user
as follows:

```nix
{
  users.users.alice.openssh.authorizedKeys.keys = [ "ssh-ed25519 AAAAB3NzaC1kc3MAAACBAPIkGWVEt4..." ];
}
```

---

# IPv4 Configuration {#sec-ipv4}

By default, NixOS uses DHCP (specifically, `dhcpcd`) to automatically
configure network interfaces. However, you can configure an interface
manually as follows:

```nix
{
  networking.interfaces.eth0.ipv4.addresses = [
    {
      address = "192.168.1.2";
      prefixLength = 24;
    }
  ];
}
```

Typically you'll also want to set a default gateway and set of name
servers:

```nix
{
  networking.defaultGateway = "192.168.1.1";
  networking.nameservers = [ "8.8.8.8" ];
}
```

::: {.note}
Addresses and routes for statically configured interfaces and the default
gateway are set up by systemd services named
`network-addresses-<interface>.service`. The name servers configuration,
instead, is performed by `network-local-commands.service` using resolvconf.
:::

::: {.note}
If needed, for example if addresses/routes were added/removed,
you can reset the network configuration by running
`systemctl restart networking-scripted.target`
:::

The host name is set using [](#opt-networking.hostName):

```nix
{ networking.hostName = "cartman"; }
```

The default host name is `nixos`. Set it to the empty string (`""`) to
allow the DHCP server to provide the host name.

---

# IPv6 Configuration {#sec-ipv6}

IPv6 is enabled by default. Stateless address autoconfiguration is used
to automatically assign IPv6 addresses to all interfaces, and Privacy
Extensions (RFC 4941) are enabled by default. You can adjust the default
for this by setting [](#opt-networking.tempAddresses). This option
may be overridden on a per-interface basis by
[](#opt-networking.interfaces._name_.tempAddress). You can disable
IPv6 support globally by setting:

```nix
{ networking.enableIPv6 = false; }
```

You can disable IPv6 on a single interface using a normal sysctl (in
this example, we use interface `eth0`):

```nix
{ boot.kernel.sysctl."net.ipv6.conf.eth0.disable_ipv6" = true; }
```

As with IPv4 networking interfaces are automatically configured via
DHCPv6. You can configure an interface manually:

```nix
{
  networking.interfaces.eth0.ipv6.addresses = [
    {
      address = "fe00:aa:bb:cc::2";
      prefixLength = 64;
    }
  ];
}
```

For configuring a gateway, optionally with explicitly specified
interface:

```nix
{
  networking.defaultGateway6 = {
    address = "fe00::1";
    interface = "enp0s3";
  };
}
```

See [](#sec-ipv4) for similar examples and additional information.

---

# Firewall {#sec-firewall}

NixOS has a simple stateful firewall that blocks incoming connections
and other unexpected packets. The firewall applies to both IPv4 and IPv6
traffic. It is enabled by default. It can be disabled as follows:

```nix
{ networking.firewall.enable = false; }
```

If the firewall is enabled, you can open specific TCP ports to the
outside world:

```nix
{
  networking.firewall.allowedTCPPorts = [
    80
    443
  ];
}
```

Note that TCP port 22 (ssh) is opened automatically if the SSH daemon is
enabled (`services.openssh.enable = true`). UDP ports can be opened through
[](#opt-networking.firewall.allowedUDPPorts).

To open ranges of TCP ports:

```nix
{
  networking.firewall.allowedTCPPortRanges = [
    {
      from = 4000;
      to = 4007;
    }
    {
      from = 8000;
      to = 8010;
    }
  ];
}
```

Similarly, UDP port ranges can be opened through
[](#opt-networking.firewall.allowedUDPPortRanges).

---

# Wireless Networks {#sec-wireless}

For a desktop installation using NetworkManager (e.g., GNOME or KDE), you should
make sure the user is in the `networkmanager` group and you can just configure
wireless networks from the Settings app.
It is also possible to declare (some) wireless networks from the NixOS
configuration with [](#opt-networking.networkmanager.ensureProfiles.profiles).

Alternatively, without NetworkManager, you can configure wireless networks
using wpa_supplicant by setting

```nix
{ networking.wireless.enable = true; }
```

By default, wpa_supplicant will manage the first wireless interface that becomes
available. It is however recommended to set the desired interface name with
[](#opt-networking.wireless.interfaces), as it is more reliable.

If multiple interfaces are set, NixOS will create a separate systemd service
for each one of them, for example:

```nix
{
  networking.wireless.interfaces = [
    "wlan0"
    "wlan1"
  ];
}
```

results in `wpa_supplicant-wlan0.service` and `wpa_supplicant-wlan1.service`.


## Declarative configuration {#sec-wireless-declarative}

NixOS lets you specify networks declaratively:

```nix
{
  networking.wireless.networks = {
    # SSID with no spaces or special characters
    echelon = {
      psk = "abcdefgh";
    };
    # SSID with spaces and/or special characters
    "echelon's AP" = {
      psk = "ijklmnop";
    };
    # Hidden SSID
    echelon = {
      hidden = true;
      psk = "qrstuvwx";
    };
    free.wifi = { }; # Public wireless network
  };
}
```

If the network is using WPA2, the pre-shared key (PSK) can be also specified
with the `pskRaw` option as 64 hexadecimal digits.
This is useful to both obfuscate passwords and make the connection slightly
faster, as the key doesn't need to be derived every time.

The `pskRaw` values can be calculated using the `wpa_passphrase` tool:

```console
$ wpa_passphrase ESSID PSK
network={
        ssid="echelon"
        #psk="abcdefgh"
        psk=dca6d6ed41f4ab5a984c9f55f6f66d4efdc720ebf66959810f4329bb391c5435
}
```

```nix
{
  networking.wireless.networks.echelon = {
    pskRaw = "dca6d6ed41f4ab5a984c9f55f6f66d4efdc720ebf66959810f4329bb391c5435";
  };
}
```

Other wpa_supplicant configuration can be set using the {option}`extraConfig`
option, either globally or per-network. For example:
```
{
  networking.wireless.extraConfig = ''
    # Enable MAC address randomization by default
    mac_addr=1
  '';
  networking.wireless.networks.home = {
    psk = "abcdefgh";
    extraConfig = ''
      # Use the real MAC address at home
      mac_addr=0
    '';
  };
}
```

::: {.note}
The generated wpa_supplicant configuration file is linked to
`/etc/wpa_supplicant/nixos.conf` for easier inspection.
:::


Be aware that in the previous examples the keys would be written to the Nix
store in plain text and readable to every local user.
It is recommended to specify secrets (PSKs, passwords, etc.) in a safe way using
[](#opt-networking.wireless.secretsFile) and the `ext:` syntax. For example:

```nix
{
  networking.wireless.secretsFile = "/run/secrets/wireless.conf";
  networking.wireless.networks = {
    home = {
      pskRaw = "ext:psk_home";
    };
    work.auth = ''
      eap=PEAP
      identity="my-user@example.com"
      password=ext:pass_work
    '';
  };
}
```

where `/run/secrets/wireless.conf` contains

```
psk_home=mypassword
pass_work=myworkpassword
```

::: {.note}
The secrets file should be owned and placed in a location accessible (only) by
the `wpa_supplicant` user. Only certain fields support the `ext:` syntax,
for example `psk`, `sae_password` and `password`, but not `ssid`.
:::


## Imperative configuration  {#sec-wireless-imperative}

It can be useful to add a new network without rebuilding the NixOS
configuration, particularly if you don't yet have Internet access.
Setting [](#opt-networking.wireless.userControlled) to `true` will allow users
of the `wpa_supplicant` group to configure wpa_supplicant imperatively.

For example, using `wpa_cli` you can add a new network and connect to it as:
```console
# wpa_cli
Selected interface 'wlan0'

Interactive mode

> add_network
10
> set_network 10 ssid "echelon"
OK
> set_network 10 psk "abcdefgh"
OK
> select_network 10
OK
```

Note that these changes will be lost when wpa_supplicant is restarted.
To make them persistent, the option
[](#opt-networking.wireless.allowAuxiliaryImperativeNetworks) can be set, which
allows to use the `save` command in `wpa_cli`, or even directly editing the
file `/etc/wpa_supplicant/imperative.conf`.

::: {.note}
Remember that after manually editing `imperative.conf` the wpa_supplicant daemon
needs to be restarted:
```console
# systemctl restart wpa_supplicant.service
```
or
```console
# systemctl restart wpa_supplicant-<interface>.service
```
if [](#opt-networking.wireless.interfaces) has been set.
:::


## Enterprise networks {#sec-wireless-enterprise}

Networks with more sophisticated authentication protocols can be configured
using the free-form `auth` option, for example:

```
{
  networking.wireless.networks = {
    eduroam.auth = ''
      key_mgmt=WPA-EAP
      eap=PEAP
      identity="alice.smith@example.com"
      password="veryLongPassword$!3"
      ca_cert="/etc/wpa_supplicant/eduroam.pem"
    '';
  };
}
```

For examples and a list of available options, see the
[wpa_supplicant.conf(5)](man:wpa_supplicant.conf(5)) man page.

::: {.warning}
By default, security hardening measures that limit access to files, devices and
network capabilities are applied to the wpa_supplicant daemon.

Certificates and other files supplied here need to be readable by the
`wpa_supplicant` user; it is therefore recommended to store them in the
`/etc/wpa_supplicant` directory.

If your network authentication protocol requires write access to files, smart
cards or TPM devices, you may have to disable security hardening with
```nix
{ networking.wireless.enableHardening = false; }
```

This setting also applies to networks configured from NetworkManager, unless
the WiFi [backend](#opt-networking.networkmanager.wifi.backend) in use is not
wpa_supplicant.
:::

---

# Ad-Hoc Configuration {#ad-hoc-network-config}

You can use [](#opt-networking.localCommands) to specify shell commands to be
run after the network interfaces have been created, but not necessarily fully
configured.
This is useful for doing network configuration not covered by the existing
NixOS modules. For example, you can create a network namespace and a pair
of virtual ethernet devices like this:

```nix
{
  networking.localCommands = ''
    ip netns add mynet
    ip link add name veth-in type veth peer name veth-out
    ip link set dev veth-out netns mynet
  '';
}
```

::: {.note}
The commands should ideally be idempotent, so it's recommended to perform
cleanups of the state you create (e.g. virtual interfaces), or at least make
sure possible failures are handled.
:::

---

# Renaming network interfaces {#sec-rename-ifs}

NixOS uses the udev [predictable naming
scheme](https://systemd.io/PREDICTABLE_INTERFACE_NAMES/) to assign names
to network interfaces. This means that by default cards are not given
the traditional names like `eth0` or `eth1`, whose order can change
unpredictably across reboots. Instead, relying on physical locations and
firmware information, the scheme produces names like `ens1`, `enp2s0`,
etc.

These names are predictable but less memorable and not necessarily
stable: for example installing new hardware or changing firmware
settings can result in a [name
change](https://github.com/systemd/systemd/issues/3715#issue-165347602).
If this is undesirable, for example if you have a single ethernet card,
you can revert to the traditional scheme by setting
[](#opt-networking.usePredictableInterfaceNames)
to `false`.

## Assigning custom names {#sec-custom-ifnames}

In case there are multiple interfaces of the same type, it's better to
assign custom names based on the device hardware address. For example,
we assign the name `wan` to the interface with MAC address
`52:54:00:12:01:01` using a netword link unit:

```nix
{
  systemd.network.links."10-wan" = {
    matchConfig.PermanentMACAddress = "52:54:00:12:01:01";
    linkConfig.Name = "wan";
  };
}
```

Note that links are directly read by udev, *not networkd*, and will work
even if networkd is disabled.

Alternatively, we can use a plain old udev rule:

```nix
{
  boot.initrd.services.udev.rules = ''
    SUBSYSTEM=="net", ACTION=="add", DRIVERS=="?*", \
    ATTR{address}=="52:54:00:12:01:01", KERNEL=="eth*", NAME="wan"
  '';
}
```

::: {.warning}
The rule must be installed in the initrd using
`boot.initrd.services.udev.rules`, not the usual `services.udev.extraRules`
option. This is to avoid race conditions with other programs controlling
the interface.
:::

---

