<!-- source: https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/stable/#sec-x11 -->
<!-- repo: NixOS/nixpkgs -->
<!-- auto-generated by scripts/generate-references.sh - DO NOT EDIT MANUALLY -->

# NixOS Display Server (X11 / Wayland)

# X Window System {#sec-x11}

The X Window System (X11) provides the basis of NixOS' graphical user
interface. It can be enabled as follows:

```nix
{ services.xserver.enable = true; }
```

The X server will automatically detect and use the appropriate video
driver from a set of X.org drivers (such as `vesa` and `intel`). You can
also specify a driver manually, e.g.

```nix
{ services.xserver.videoDrivers = [ "r128" ]; }
```

to enable X.org's `xf86-video-r128` driver.

You also need to enable at least one desktop or window manager.
Otherwise, you can only log into a plain undecorated `xterm` window.
Thus you should pick one or more of the following lines:

```nix
{
  services.desktopManager.plasma6.enable = true;
  services.xserver.desktopManager.xfce.enable = true;
  services.desktopManager.gnome.enable = true;
  services.xserver.desktopManager.mate.enable = true;
  services.xserver.windowManager.xmonad.enable = true;
  services.xserver.windowManager.twm.enable = true;
  services.xserver.windowManager.icewm.enable = true;
  services.xserver.windowManager.i3.enable = true;
  services.xserver.windowManager.herbstluftwm.enable = true;
}
```

NixOS's default *display manager* (the program that provides a graphical
login prompt and manages the X server) is LightDM. You can select an
alternative one by picking one of the following lines:

```nix
{
  services.displayManager.sddm.enable = true;
  services.displayManager.gdm.enable = true;
}
```

You can set the keyboard layout (and optionally the layout variant):

```nix
{
  services.xserver.xkb.layout = "de";
  services.xserver.xkb.variant = "neo";
}
```

The X server is started automatically at boot time. If you don't want
this to happen, you can set:

```nix
{ services.xserver.autorun = false; }
```

The X server can then be started manually:

```ShellSession
# systemctl start display-manager.service
```

On 64-bit systems, if you want OpenGL for 32-bit programs such as in
Wine, you should also set the following:

```nix
{ hardware.graphics.enable32Bit = true; }
```

## Auto-login {#sec-x11-auto-login}

The x11 login screen can be skipped entirely, automatically logging you
into your window manager and desktop environment when you boot your
computer.

This is especially helpful if you have disk encryption enabled. Since
you already have to provide a password to decrypt your disk, entering a
second password to login can be redundant.

To enable auto-login, you need to define your default window manager and
desktop environment. If you wanted no desktop environment and i3 as your
your window manager, you'd define:

```nix
{ services.displayManager.defaultSession = "none+i3"; }
```

Every display manager in NixOS supports auto-login, here is an example
using lightdm for a user `alice`:

```nix
{
  services.xserver.displayManager.lightdm.enable = true;
  services.displayManager.autoLogin.enable = true;
  services.displayManager.autoLogin.user = "alice";
}
```

## Running X without a display manager  {#sec-x11-startx}

It is possible to avoid a display manager entirely and starting the X server
manually from a virtual terminal. Add to your configuration:
```nix
{
  services.xserver.displayManager.startx = {
    enable = true;
    generateScript = true;
  };
}
```
then you can start the X server with the `startx` command.

The second option will generate a base `xinitrc` script that will run your
window manager and set up the systemd user session.
You can extend the script using the
[extraCommands](#opt-services.xserver.displayManager.startx.extraCommands)
option, for example:
```nix
{
  services.xserver.displayManager.startx = {
    generateScript = true;
    extraCommands = ''
      xrdb -load .Xresources
      xsetroot -solid '#666661'
      xsetroot -cursor_name left_ptr
    '';
  };
}
```
or, alternatively, you can write your own from scratch in `~/.xinitrc`.

In this case, remember you're responsible for starting the window manager, for
example:
```shell
sxhkd &
bspwm &
```
and if you have enabled some systemd user service, you will probably want to
also add these lines too:
```shell
# import required env variables from the current shell
systemctl --user import-environment DISPLAY XDG_SESSION_ID
# start all graphical user services
systemctl --user start nixos-fake-graphical-session.target
# start the user dbus daemon
dbus-daemon --session --address="unix:path=/run/user/$(id -u)/bus" &
```

## Intel Graphics drivers {#sec-x11--graphics-cards-intel}

The default and recommended driver for Intel Graphics in X.org is `modesetting`
(included in the xorg-server package itself).
This is a generic driver which uses the kernel [mode
setting](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mode_setting) (KMS) mechanism, it
supports Glamor (2D graphics acceleration via OpenGL) and is actively
maintained, it may perform worse in some cases (like in old chipsets).

There is a second driver, `intel` (provided by the xf86-video-intel package),
specific to older Intel iGPUs from generation 2 to 9. It is not recommended by
most distributions: it lacks several modern features (for example, it doesn't
support Glamor) and the package hasn't been officially updated since 2015.

Third generation and older iGPUs (15-20+ years old) are not supported by the
`modesetting` driver (X will crash upon startup). Thus, the `intel` driver is
required for these chipsets.
Otherwise, the results vary depending on the hardware, so you may have to try
both drivers. Use the option
[](#opt-services.xserver.videoDrivers)
to set one. The recommended configuration for modern systems is:

```nix
{ services.xserver.videoDrivers = [ "modesetting" ]; }
```
::: {.note}
The `modesetting` driver doesn't currently provide a `TearFree` option (this
will become available in an upcoming X.org release), So, without using a
compositor (for example, see [](#opt-services.picom.enable)) you will
experience screen tearing.
:::

If you experience screen tearing no matter what, this configuration was
reported to resolve the issue:

```nix
{
  services.xserver.videoDrivers = [ "intel" ];
  services.xserver.deviceSection = ''
    Option "DRI" "2"
    Option "TearFree" "true"
  '';
}
```

Note that this will likely downgrade the performance compared to
`modesetting` or `intel` with DRI 3 (default).

## Proprietary NVIDIA drivers {#sec-x11-graphics-cards-nvidia}

NVIDIA provides a proprietary driver for its graphics cards that has
better 3D performance than the X.org drivers. It is not enabled by
default because it's not free software. You can enable it as follows:

```nix
{ services.xserver.videoDrivers = [ "nvidia" ]; }
```

If you have an older card, you may have to use one of the legacy drivers:

```nix
{
  hardware.nvidia.package = config.boot.kernelPackages.nvidiaPackages.legacy_470;
  hardware.nvidia.package = config.boot.kernelPackages.nvidiaPackages.legacy_390;
  hardware.nvidia.package = config.boot.kernelPackages.nvidiaPackages.legacy_340;
}
```

You may need to reboot after enabling this driver to prevent a clash
with other kernel modules.

## Touchpads {#sec-x11-touchpads}

Support for Synaptics touchpads (found in many laptops such as the Dell
Latitude series) can be enabled as follows:

```nix
{ services.libinput.enable = true; }
```

The driver has many options (see [](#ch-options)).
For instance, the following disables tap-to-click behavior:

```nix
{ services.libinput.touchpad.tapping = false; }
```

Note: the use of `services.xserver.synaptics` is deprecated since NixOS
17.09.

## GTK/Qt themes {#sec-x11-gtk-and-qt-themes}

GTK themes can be installed either to user profile or system-wide (via
`environment.systemPackages`). To make Qt 5 applications look similar to
GTK ones, you can use the following configuration:

```nix
{
  qt.enable = true;
  qt.platformTheme = "gtk2";
  qt.style = "gtk2";
}
```

## Custom XKB layouts {#custom-xkb-layouts}

It is possible to install custom [ XKB
](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/X_keyboard_extension) keyboard layouts
using the option `services.xserver.xkb.extraLayouts`.

As a first example, we are going to create a layout based on the basic
US layout, with an additional layer to type some greek symbols by
pressing the right-alt key.

Create a file called `us-greek` with the following content (under a
directory called `symbols`; it's an XKB peculiarity that will help with
testing):

```
xkb_symbols "us-greek"
{
  include "us(basic)"            // includes the base US keys
  include "level3(ralt_switch)"  // configures right alt as a third level switch

  key <LatA> { [ a, A, Greek_alpha ] };
  key <LatB> { [ b, B, Greek_beta  ] };
  key <LatG> { [ g, G, Greek_gamma ] };
  key <LatD> { [ d, D, Greek_delta ] };
  key <LatZ> { [ z, Z, Greek_zeta  ] };
};
```

A minimal layout specification must include the following:

```nix
{
  services.xserver.xkb.extraLayouts.us-greek = {
    description = "US layout with alt-gr greek";
    languages = [ "eng" ];
    symbolsFile = /yourpath/symbols/us-greek;
  };
}
```

::: {.note}
The name (after `extraLayouts.`) should match the one given to the
`xkb_symbols` block.
:::

Applying this customization requires rebuilding several packages, and a
broken XKB file can lead to the X session crashing at login. Therefore,
you're strongly advised to **test your layout before applying it**:

```ShellSession
$ nix-shell -p xkbcomp
$ setxkbmap -I/yourpath us-greek -print | xkbcomp -I/yourpath - $DISPLAY
```

You can inspect the predefined XKB files for examples:

```ShellSession
$ echo "$(nix-build --no-out-link '<nixpkgs>' -A xkeyboard-config)/etc/X11/xkb/"
```

Once the configuration is applied, and you did a logout/login cycle, the
layout should be ready to use. You can try it by e.g. running
`setxkbmap us-greek` and then type `<alt>+a` (it may not get applied in
your terminal straight away). To change the default, the usual
`services.xserver.xkb.layout` option can still be used.

A layout can have several other components besides `xkb_symbols`, for
example we will define new keycodes for some multimedia key and bind
these to some symbol.

Use the *xev* utility from `pkgs.xev` to find the codes of the keys
of interest, then create a `media-key` file to hold the keycodes
definitions

```
xkb_keycodes "media"
{
 <volUp>   = 123;
 <volDown> = 456;
}
```

Now use the newly define keycodes in `media-sym`:

```
xkb_symbols "media"
{
 key.type = "ONE_LEVEL";
 key <volUp>   { [ XF86AudioLowerVolume ] };
 key <volDown> { [ XF86AudioRaiseVolume ] };
}
```

As before, to install the layout do

```nix
{
  services.xserver.xkb.extraLayouts.media = {
    description = "Multimedia keys remapping";
    languages = [ "eng" ];
    symbolsFile = /path/to/media-key;
    keycodesFile = /path/to/media-sym;
  };
}
```

::: {.note}
The function `pkgs.writeText <filename> <content>` can be useful if you
prefer to keep the layout definitions inside the NixOS configuration.
:::

Unfortunately, the Xorg server does not (currently) support setting a
keymap directly but relies instead on XKB rules to select the matching
components (keycodes, types, ...) of a layout. This means that
components other than symbols won't be loaded by default. As a
workaround, you can set the keymap using `setxkbmap` at the start of the
session with:

```nix
{
  services.xserver.displayManager.sessionCommands = "setxkbmap -keycodes media";
}
```

If you are manually starting the X server, you should set the argument
`-xkbdir /etc/X11/xkb`, otherwise X won't find your layout files. For
example with `xinit` run

```ShellSession
$ xinit -- -xkbdir /etc/X11/xkb
```

To learn how to write layouts take a look at the XKB [documentation
](https://www.x.org/releases/current/doc/xorg-docs/input/XKB-Enhancing.html#Defining_New_Layouts).
More example layouts can also be found [here
](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/X_KeyBoard_extension#Basic_examples).

---

# Wayland {#sec-wayland}

While X11 (see [](#sec-x11)) is still the primary display technology
on NixOS, Wayland support is steadily improving. Where X11 separates the
X Server and the window manager, on Wayland those are combined: a
Wayland Compositor is like an X11 window manager, but also embeds the
Wayland 'Server' functionality. This means it is sufficient to install
a Wayland Compositor such as sway without separately enabling a Wayland
server:

```nix
{ programs.sway.enable = true; }
```

This installs the sway compositor along with some essential utilities.
Now you can start sway from the TTY console.

If you are using a wlroots-based compositor, like sway, and want to be
able to share your screen, make sure to configure Pipewire using
[](#opt-services.pipewire.enable)
and related options.

For more helpful tips and tricks, see the
[wiki page about Sway](https://wiki.nixos.org/wiki/Sway).

---

# Xfce Desktop Environment {#sec-xfce}

To enable the Xfce Desktop Environment, set

```nix
{
  services.xserver.desktopManager.xfce.enable = true;
  services.displayManager.defaultSession = "xfce";
}
```

Optionally, *picom* can be enabled for nice graphical effects, some
example settings:

```nix
{
  services.picom = {
    enable = true;
    fade = true;
    inactiveOpacity = 0.9;
    shadow = true;
    fadeDelta = 4;
  };
}
```

Some Xfce programs are not installed automatically. To install them
manually (system wide), put them into your
[](#opt-environment.systemPackages).

## Thunar {#sec-xfce-thunar-plugins}

Thunar (the Xfce file manager) is automatically enabled when Xfce is
enabled. To enable Thunar without enabling Xfce, use the configuration
option [](#opt-programs.thunar.enable) instead of adding
`pkgs.thunar` to [](#opt-environment.systemPackages).

If you'd like to add extra plugins to Thunar, add them to
[](#opt-programs.thunar.plugins). You shouldn't just add them to
[](#opt-environment.systemPackages).

## Troubleshooting {#sec-xfce-troubleshooting}

Even after enabling udisks2, volume management might not work. Thunar
and/or the desktop takes time to show up. Thunar will spit out this kind
of message on start (look at `journalctl --user -b`).

```plain
Thunar:2410): GVFS-RemoteVolumeMonitor-WARNING **: remote volume monitor with dbus name org.gtk.Private.UDisks2VolumeMonitor is not supported
```

This is caused by some needed GNOME services not running. This is all
fixed by enabling "Launch GNOME services on startup" in the Advanced
tab of the Session and Startup settings panel. Alternatively, you can
run this command to do the same thing.

```ShellSession
$ xfconf-query -c xfce4-session -p /compat/LaunchGNOME -s true
```

It is necessary to log out and log in again for this to take effect.

---

# GPU acceleration {#sec-gpu-accel}

NixOS provides various APIs that benefit from GPU hardware acceleration,
such as VA-API and VDPAU for video playback; OpenGL and Vulkan for 3D
graphics; and OpenCL for general-purpose computing. This chapter
describes how to set up GPU hardware acceleration (as far as this is not
done automatically) and how to verify that hardware acceleration is
indeed used.

Most of the aforementioned APIs are agnostic with regards to which
display server is used. Consequently, these instructions should apply
both to the X Window System and Wayland compositors.

## OpenCL {#sec-gpu-accel-opencl}

[OpenCL](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OpenCL) is a general compute API.
It is used by various applications such as Blender and Darktable to
accelerate certain operations.

OpenCL applications load drivers through the *Installable Client Driver*
(ICD) mechanism. In this mechanism, an ICD file specifies the path to
the OpenCL driver for a particular GPU family. In NixOS, there are two
ways to make ICD files visible to the ICD loader. The first is through
the `OCL_ICD_VENDORS` environment variable. This variable can contain a
directory which is scanned by the ICL loader for ICD files. For example:

```ShellSession
$ export \
  OCL_ICD_VENDORS=`nix-build '<nixpkgs>' --no-out-link -A rocmPackages.clr.icd`/etc/OpenCL/vendors/
```

The second mechanism is to add the OpenCL driver package to
[](#opt-hardware.graphics.extraPackages).
This links the ICD file under `/run/opengl-driver`, where it will be visible
to the ICD loader.

The proper installation of OpenCL drivers can be verified through the
`clinfo` command of the clinfo package. This command will report the
number of hardware devices that is found and give detailed information
for each device:

```ShellSession
$ clinfo | head -n3
Number of platforms  1
Platform Name        AMD Accelerated Parallel Processing
Platform Vendor      Advanced Micro Devices, Inc.
```

### AMD {#sec-gpu-accel-opencl-amd}

Modern AMD [Graphics Core
Next](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Graphics_Core_Next) (GCN) GPUs are
supported through the rocmPackages.clr.icd package. Adding this package to
[](#opt-hardware.graphics.extraPackages)
enables OpenCL support:

```nix
{ hardware.graphics.extraPackages = [ rocmPackages.clr.icd ]; }
```

### Intel {#sec-gpu-accel-opencl-intel}

[Intel Gen12 and later GPUs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Intel_graphics_processing_units#Gen12)
are supported by the Intel NEO OpenCL runtime that is provided by the `intel-compute-runtime` package.
The previous generations (8,9 and 11), have been moved to the `intel-compute-runtime-legacy1` package.
The proprietary Intel OpenCL runtime, in the `intel-ocl` package, is an alternative for Gen7 GPUs.

Both `intel-compute-runtime` packages, as well as the `intel-ocl` package can be added to
[](#opt-hardware.graphics.extraPackages)
to enable OpenCL support. For example, for Gen12 and later GPUs, the following
configuration can be used:

```nix
{ hardware.graphics.extraPackages = [ intel-compute-runtime ]; }
```

## Vulkan {#sec-gpu-accel-vulkan}

[Vulkan](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vulkan_(API)) is a graphics and
compute API for GPUs. It is used directly by games or indirectly though
compatibility layers like
[DXVK](https://github.com/doitsujin/dxvk/wiki).

By default, if [](#opt-hardware.graphics.enable)
is enabled, Mesa is installed and provides Vulkan for supported hardware.

Similar to OpenCL, Vulkan drivers are loaded through the *Installable
Client Driver* (ICD) mechanism. ICD files for Vulkan are JSON files that
specify the path to the driver library and the supported Vulkan version.
All successfully loaded drivers are exposed to the application as
different GPUs. In NixOS, there are two ways to make ICD files visible
to Vulkan applications: an environment variable and a module option.

The way to do this is to add the Vulkan driver package to
[](#opt-hardware.graphics.extraPackages).
This links the ICD file under `/run/opengl-driver`, where it will be
visible to the ICD loader.

The proper installation of Vulkan drivers can be verified through the
`vulkaninfo` command of the vulkan-tools package. This command will
report the hardware devices and drivers found, in this example output
amdvlk and radv:

```ShellSession
$ vulkaninfo | grep GPU
                GPU id  : 0 (Unknown AMD GPU)
                GPU id  : 1 (AMD RADV NAVI10 (LLVM 9.0.1))
     ...
GPU0:
        deviceType     = PHYSICAL_DEVICE_TYPE_DISCRETE_GPU
        deviceName     = Unknown AMD GPU
GPU1:
        deviceType     = PHYSICAL_DEVICE_TYPE_DISCRETE_GPU
```

A simple graphical application that uses Vulkan is `vkcube` from the
vulkan-tools package.

### AMD {#sec-gpu-accel-vulkan-amd}

Modern AMD [Graphics Core
Next](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Graphics_Core_Next) (GCN) GPUs are
supported through the RADV driver, which is part of mesa.

## VA-API {#sec-gpu-accel-va-api}

[VA-API (Video Acceleration API)](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/articles/technical/linuxmedia-vaapi.html)
is an open-source library and API specification, which provides access to
graphics hardware acceleration capabilities for video processing.

VA-API drivers are loaded by `libva`. The version in nixpkgs is built to search
the opengl driver path, so drivers can be installed in
[](#opt-hardware.graphics.extraPackages).

VA-API can be tested using:

```ShellSession
$ nix-shell -p libva-utils --run vainfo
```

### Intel {#sec-gpu-accel-va-api-intel}

Modern Intel GPUs use the iHD driver, which can be installed with:

```nix
{ hardware.graphics.extraPackages = [ intel-media-driver ]; }
```

Older Intel GPUs use the i965 driver, which can be installed with:

```nix
{ hardware.graphics.extraPackages = [ intel-vaapi-driver ]; }
```

## Common issues {#sec-gpu-accel-common-issues}

### User permissions {#sec-gpu-accel-common-issues-permissions}

Except where noted explicitly, it should not be necessary to adjust user
permissions to use these acceleration APIs. In the default
configuration, GPU devices have world-read/write permissions
(`/dev/dri/renderD*`) or are tagged as `uaccess` (`/dev/dri/card*`). The
access control lists of devices with the `uaccess` tag will be updated
automatically when a user logs in through `systemd-logind`. For example,
if the user *alice* is logged in, the access control list should look as
follows:

```ShellSession
$ getfacl /dev/dri/card0
# file: dev/dri/card0
# owner: root
# group: video
user::rw-
user:alice:rw-
group::rw-
mask::rw-
other::---
```

If you disabled (this functionality of) `systemd-logind`, you may need
to add the user to the `video` group and log in again.

### Mixing different versions of nixpkgs {#sec-gpu-accel-common-issues-mixing-nixpkgs}

The *Installable Client Driver* (ICD) mechanism used by OpenCL and
Vulkan loads runtimes into its address space using `dlopen`. Mixing an
ICD loader mechanism and runtimes from different version of nixpkgs may
not work. For example, if the ICD loader uses an older version of glibc
than the runtime, the runtime may not be loadable due to missing
symbols. Unfortunately, the loader will generally be quiet about such
issues.

If you suspect that you are running into library version mismatches
between an ICL loader and a runtime, you could run an application with
the `LD_DEBUG` variable set to get more diagnostic information. For
example, OpenCL can be tested with `LD_DEBUG=files clinfo`, which should
report missing symbols.

---

