<!-- source: https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/stable/#sec-package-management -->
<!-- repo: NixOS/nixpkgs -->
<!-- auto-generated by scripts/generate-references.sh - DO NOT EDIT MANUALLY -->

# NixOS Package Management

# Package Management {#sec-package-management}

This section describes how to add additional packages to your system.
NixOS has two distinct styles of package management:

-   *Declarative*, where you declare what packages you want in your
    `configuration.nix`. Every time you run `nixos-rebuild`, NixOS will
    ensure that you get a consistent set of binaries corresponding to
    your specification.

-   *Ad hoc*, where you install, upgrade and uninstall packages via the
    `nix-env` command. This style allows mixing packages from different
    Nixpkgs versions. It's the only choice for non-root users.

```{=include=} sections
declarative-packages.section.md
ad-hoc-packages.section.md
```

---

# Declarative Package Management {#sec-declarative-package-mgmt}

With declarative package management, you specify which packages you want
on your system by setting the option
[](#opt-environment.systemPackages). For instance, adding the
following line to `configuration.nix` enables the Mozilla Thunderbird
email application:

```nix
{ environment.systemPackages = [ pkgs.thunderbird ]; }
```

The effect of this specification is that the Thunderbird package from
Nixpkgs will be built or downloaded as part of the system when you run
`nixos-rebuild switch`.

::: {.note}
Some packages require additional global configuration such as D-Bus or
systemd service registration so adding them to
[](#opt-environment.systemPackages) might not be sufficient. You are
advised to check the [list of options](#ch-options) whether a NixOS
module for the package does not exist.
:::

You can get a list of the available packages as follows:

```ShellSession
$ nix-env -qaP '*' --description
nixos.firefox   firefox-23.0   Mozilla Firefox - the browser, reloaded
...
```

The first column in the output is the *attribute name*, such as
`nixos.thunderbird`.

Note: the `nixos` prefix tells us that we want to get the package from
the `nixos` channel and works only in CLI tools. In declarative
configuration, use `pkgs` prefix (variable).

To "uninstall" a package, remove it from
[](#opt-environment.systemPackages) and run `nixos-rebuild switch`.

```{=include=} sections
customizing-packages.section.md
adding-custom-packages.section.md
```

---

# Ad-Hoc Package Management {#sec-ad-hoc-packages}

With the command `nix-env`, you can install and uninstall packages from
the command line. For instance, to install Mozilla Thunderbird:

```ShellSession
$ nix-env -iA nixos.thunderbird
```

If you invoke this as root, the package is installed in the Nix profile
`/nix/var/nix/profiles/default` and visible to all users of the system;
otherwise, the package ends up in
`/nix/var/nix/profiles/per-user/username/profile` and is not visible to
other users. The `-A` flag specifies the package by its attribute name;
without it, the package is installed by matching against its package
name (e.g. `thunderbird`). The latter is slower because it requires
matching against all available Nix packages, and is ambiguous if there
are multiple matching packages.

Packages come from the NixOS channel. You typically upgrade a package by
updating to the latest version of the NixOS channel:

```ShellSession
$ nix-channel --update nixos
```

and then running `nix-env -i` again. Other packages in the profile are
*not* affected; this is the crucial difference with the declarative
style of package management, where running `nixos-rebuild switch` causes
all packages to be updated to their current versions in the NixOS
channel. You can however upgrade all packages for which there is a newer
version by doing:

```ShellSession
$ nix-env -u '*'
```

A package can be uninstalled using the `-e` flag:

```ShellSession
$ nix-env -e thunderbird
```

Finally, you can roll back an undesirable `nix-env` action:

```ShellSession
$ nix-env --rollback
```

`nix-env` has many more flags. For details, see the nix-env(1) manpage or
the Nix manual.

---

# Adding Custom Packages {#sec-custom-packages}

It's possible that a package you need is not available in NixOS. In that
case, you can do two things. Either you can package it with Nix, or you can try
to use prebuilt packages from upstream. Due to the peculiarities of NixOS, it
is important to note that building software from source is often easier than
using pre-built executables.

## Building with Nix {#sec-custom-packages-nix}

This can be done either in-tree or out-of-tree. For an in-tree build, you can
clone the Nixpkgs repository, add the package to your clone, and (optionally)
submit a patch or pull request to have it accepted into the main Nixpkgs
repository. This is described in detail in the [Nixpkgs
manual](https://nixos.org/nixpkgs/manual). In short, you clone Nixpkgs:

```ShellSession
$ git clone https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs
$ cd nixpkgs
```

Then you write and test the package as described in the Nixpkgs manual.
Finally, you add it to [](#opt-environment.systemPackages), e.g.

```nix
{ environment.systemPackages = [ pkgs.my-package ]; }
```

and you run `nixos-rebuild`, specifying your own Nixpkgs tree:

```ShellSession
# nixos-rebuild switch -I nixpkgs=/path/to/my/nixpkgs
```

The second possibility is to add the package outside of the Nixpkgs
tree. For instance, here is how you specify a build of the
[GNU Hello](https://www.gnu.org/software/hello/) package directly in
`configuration.nix`:

```nix
{
  environment.systemPackages =
    let
      my-hello =
        with pkgs;
        stdenv.mkDerivation rec {
          name = "hello-2.8";
          src = fetchurl {
            url = "mirror://gnu/hello/${name}.tar.gz";
            hash = "sha256-5rd/gffPfa761Kn1tl3myunD8TuM+66oy1O7XqVGDXM=";
          };
        };
    in
    [ my-hello ];
}
```

Of course, you can also move the definition of `my-hello` into a
separate Nix expression, e.g.

```nix
{ environment.systemPackages = [ (import ./my-hello.nix) ]; }
```

where `my-hello.nix` contains:

```nix
with import <nixpkgs> { }; # bring all of Nixpkgs into scope

stdenv.mkDerivation rec {
  name = "hello-2.8";
  src = fetchurl {
    url = "mirror://gnu/hello/${name}.tar.gz";
    hash = "sha256-5rd/gffPfa761Kn1tl3myunD8TuM+66oy1O7XqVGDXM=";
  };
}
```

This allows testing the package easily:

```ShellSession
$ nix-build my-hello.nix
$ ./result/bin/hello
Hello, world!
```

## Using pre-built executables {#sec-custom-packages-prebuilt}

Most pre-built executables will not work on NixOS. There are two notable
exceptions: flatpaks and AppImages. For flatpaks see the [dedicated
section](#module-services-flatpak). AppImages can run "as-is" on NixOS.

First you need to enable AppImage support: add to `/etc/nixos/configuration.nix`

```nix
{
  programs.appimage.enable = true;
  programs.appimage.binfmt = true;
}
```

Then you can run the AppImage "as-is" or with `appimage-run foo.appimage`.

If there are shared libraries missing add them with

```nix
{
  programs.appimage.package = pkgs.appimage-run.override {
    extraPkgs = pkgs: [
      # missing libraries here, e.g.: `pkgs.libepoxy`
    ];
  };
}
```

To make other pre-built executables work on NixOS, you need to package them
with Nix and special helpers like `autoPatchelfHook` or `buildFHSEnv`. See
the [Nixpkgs manual](https://nixos.org/nixpkgs/manual) for details. This
is complex and often doing a source build is easier.

---

# Customising Packages {#sec-customising-packages}

The Nixpkgs configuration for a NixOS system is set by the {option}`nixpkgs.config` option.

::::{.example}
# Globally allow unfree packages

```nix
{
  nixpkgs.config = {
    allowUnfree = true;
  };
}
```

:::{.note}
This only allows unfree software in the given NixOS configuration.
For users invoking Nix commands such as [`nix-build`](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/command-ref/nix-build), Nixpkgs is configured independently.
See the [Nixpkgs manual section on global configuration](https://nixos.org/manual/nixpkgs/unstable/#chap-packageconfig) for details.
:::
::::

<!-- TODO(@fricklerhandwerk)
all of the following should go to the Nixpkgs manual, it has nothing to do with NixOS
-->

Some packages in Nixpkgs have options to enable or disable optional functionality, or change other aspects of the package.

::: {.warning}
Unfortunately, Nixpkgs currently lacks a way to query available package configuration options.
:::

::: {.note}
For example, many packages come with extensions one might add.
Examples include:
- [`passExtensions.pass-otp`](https://search.nixos.org/packages?query=passExtensions.pass-otp)
- [`python312Packages.requests`](https://search.nixos.org/packages?query=python312Packages.requests)

You can use them like this:
```nix
{
  environment.systemPackages = with pkgs; [
    sl
    (pass.withExtensions (
      subpkgs: with subpkgs; [
        pass-audit
        pass-otp
        pass-genphrase
      ]
    ))
    (python3.withPackages (subpkgs: with subpkgs; [ requests ]))
    cowsay
  ];
}
```
:::

Apart from high-level options, it's possible to tweak a package in
almost arbitrary ways, such as changing or disabling dependencies of a
package. For instance, the Emacs package in Nixpkgs by default has a
dependency on GTK 2. If you want to build it against GTK 3, you can
specify that as follows:

```nix
{ environment.systemPackages = [ (pkgs.emacs.override { gtk = pkgs.gtk3; }) ]; }
```

The function `override` performs the call to the Nix function that
produces Emacs, with the original arguments amended by the set of
arguments specified by you. So here the function argument `gtk` gets the
value `pkgs.gtk3`, causing Emacs to depend on GTK 3. (The parentheses
are necessary because in Nix, function application binds more weakly
than list construction, so without them,
[](#opt-environment.systemPackages)
would be a list with two elements.)

Even greater customisation is possible using the function
`overrideAttrs`. While the `override` mechanism above overrides the
arguments of a package function, `overrideAttrs` allows changing the
*attributes* passed to `mkDerivation`. This permits changing any aspect
of the package, such as the source code. For instance, if you want to
override the source code of Emacs, you can say:

```nix
{
  environment.systemPackages = [
    (pkgs.emacs.overrideAttrs (oldAttrs: {
      name = "emacs-25.0-pre";
      src = /path/to/my/emacs/tree;
    }))
  ];
}
```

Here, `overrideAttrs` takes the Nix derivation specified by `pkgs.emacs`
and produces a new derivation in which the original's `name` and `src`
attribute have been replaced by the given values by re-calling
`stdenv.mkDerivation`. The original attributes are accessible via the
function argument, which is conventionally named `oldAttrs`.

The overrides shown above are not global. They do not affect the
original package; other packages in Nixpkgs continue to depend on the
original rather than the customised package. This means that if another
package in your system depends on the original package, you end up with
two instances of the package. If you want to have everything depend on
your customised instance, you can apply a *global* override as follows:

```nix
{
  nixpkgs.config.packageOverrides = pkgs: {
    emacs = pkgs.emacs.override { gtk = pkgs.gtk3; };
  };
}
```

The effect of this definition is essentially equivalent to modifying the
`emacs` attribute in the Nixpkgs source tree. Any package in Nixpkgs
that depends on `emacs` will be passed your customised instance.
(However, the value `pkgs.emacs` in `nixpkgs.config.packageOverrides`
refers to the original rather than overridden instance, to prevent an
infinite recursion.)

---

