<!-- source: https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/stable/#ch-running -->
<!-- repo: NixOS/nixpkgs -->
<!-- auto-generated by scripts/generate-references.sh - DO NOT EDIT MANUALLY -->

# NixOS Administration

# Service Management {#sec-systemctl}

In NixOS, all system services are started and monitored using the
systemd program. systemd is the "init" process of the system (i.e. PID
1), the parent of all other processes. It manages a set of so-called
"units", which can be things like system services (programs), but also
mount points, swap files, devices, targets (groups of units) and more.
Units can have complex dependencies; for instance, one unit can require
that another unit must be successfully started before the first unit can
be started. When the system boots, it starts a unit named
`default.target`; the dependencies of this unit cause all system
services to be started, file systems to be mounted, swap files to be
activated, and so on.

## Interacting with a running systemd {#sect-nixos-systemd-general}

The command `systemctl` is the main way to interact with `systemd`. The
following paragraphs demonstrate ways to interact with any OS running
systemd as init system. NixOS is of no exception. The [next section
](#sect-nixos-systemd-nixos) explains NixOS specific things worth
knowing.

Without any arguments, `systemctl` the status of active units:

```ShellSession
$ systemctl
-.mount          loaded active mounted   /
swapfile.swap    loaded active active    /swapfile
sshd.service     loaded active running   SSH Daemon
graphical.target loaded active active    Graphical Interface
...
```

You can ask for detailed status information about a unit, for instance,
the PostgreSQL database service:

```ShellSession
$ systemctl status postgresql.service
postgresql.service - PostgreSQL Server
          Loaded: loaded (/nix/store/pn3q73mvh75gsrl8w7fdlfk3fq5qm5mw-unit/postgresql.service)
          Active: active (running) since Mon, 2013-01-07 15:55:57 CET; 9h ago
        Main PID: 2390 (postgres)
          CGroup: name=systemd:/system/postgresql.service
                  ├─2390 postgres
                  ├─2418 postgres: writer process
                  ├─2419 postgres: wal writer process
                  ├─2420 postgres: autovacuum launcher process
                  ├─2421 postgres: stats collector process
                  └─2498 postgres: zabbix zabbix [local] idle

Jan 07 15:55:55 hagbard postgres[2394]: [1-1] LOG:  database system was shut down at 2013-01-07 15:55:05 CET
Jan 07 15:55:57 hagbard postgres[2390]: [1-1] LOG:  database system is ready to accept connections
Jan 07 15:55:57 hagbard postgres[2420]: [1-1] LOG:  autovacuum launcher started
Jan 07 15:55:57 hagbard systemd[1]: Started PostgreSQL Server.
```

Note that this shows the status of the unit (active and running), all
the processes belonging to the service, as well as the most recent log
messages from the service.

Units can be stopped, started or restarted:

```ShellSession
# systemctl stop postgresql.service
# systemctl start postgresql.service
# systemctl restart postgresql.service
```

These operations are synchronous: they wait until the service has
finished starting or stopping (or has failed). Starting a unit will
cause the dependencies of that unit to be started as well (if
necessary).

## systemd in NixOS {#sect-nixos-systemd-nixos}

Packages in Nixpkgs sometimes provide systemd units with them, usually
in e.g `#pkg-out#/lib/systemd/`. Putting such a package in
`environment.systemPackages` doesn't make the service available to
users or the system.

In order to enable a systemd *system* service with provided upstream
package, use (e.g):

```nix
{ systemd.packages = [ pkgs.packagekit ]; }
```

Usually NixOS modules written by the community do the above, plus take
care of other details. If a module was written for a service you are
interested in, you'd probably need only to use
`services.#name#.enable = true;`. These services are defined in
Nixpkgs' [ `nixos/modules/` directory
](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/tree/master/nixos/modules). In case
the service is simple enough, the above method should work, and start
the service on boot.

*User* systemd services on the other hand, should be treated
differently. Given a package that has a systemd unit file at
`#pkg-out#/lib/systemd/user/`, using [](#opt-systemd.packages) will
make you able to start the service via `systemctl --user start`, but it
won't start automatically on login. However, You can imperatively
enable it by adding the package's attribute to
[](#opt-systemd.packages) and then do this (e.g):

```ShellSession
$ mkdir -p ~/.config/systemd/user/default.target.wants
$ ln -s /run/current-system/sw/lib/systemd/user/syncthing.service ~/.config/systemd/user/default.target.wants/
$ systemctl --user daemon-reload
$ systemctl --user enable syncthing.service
```

If you are interested in a timer file, use `timers.target.wants` instead
of `default.target.wants` in the 1st and 2nd command.

Using `systemctl --user enable syncthing.service` instead of the above,
will work, but it'll use the absolute path of `syncthing.service` for
the symlink, and this path is in `/nix/store/.../lib/systemd/user/`.
Hence [garbage collection](#sec-nix-gc) will remove that file and you
will wind up with a broken symlink in your systemd configuration, which
in turn will not make the service / timer start on login.

### Defining custom services {#sect-nixos-systemd-custom-services}

You can define services by adding them to `systemd.services`:

```nix
{
  systemd.services.myservice = {
    after = [ "network-online.target" ];
    requires = [ "network-online.target" ];

    before = [ "multi-user.target" ];
    wantedBy = [ "multi-user.target" ];

    serviceConfig = {
      ExecStart = "...";
    };
  };
}
```

If you want to specify a multi-line script for `ExecStart`,
you may want to use `pkgs.writeShellScript`.

### Template units {#sect-nixos-systemd-template-units}

systemd supports templated units where a base unit can be started multiple
times with a different parameter. The syntax to accomplish this is
`service-name@instance-name.service`. Units get the instance name passed to
them (see `systemd.unit(5)`). NixOS has support for these kinds of units and
for template-specific overrides. A service needs to be defined twice, once
for the base unit and once for the instance. All instances must include
`overrideStrategy = "asDropin"` for the change detection to work. This
example illustrates this:
```nix
{
  systemd.services = {
    "base-unit@".serviceConfig = {
      ExecStart = "...";
      User = "...";
    };
    "base-unit@instance-a" = {
      overrideStrategy = "asDropin"; # needed for templates to work
      wantedBy = [ "multi-user.target" ]; # causes NixOS to manage the instance
    };
    "base-unit@instance-b" = {
      overrideStrategy = "asDropin"; # needed for templates to work
      wantedBy = [ "multi-user.target" ]; # causes NixOS to manage the instance
      serviceConfig.User = "root"; # also override something for this specific instance
    };
  };
}
```

---

# Logging {#sec-logging}

System-wide logging is provided by systemd's *journal*, which subsumes
traditional logging daemons such as syslogd and klogd. Log entries are
kept in binary files in `/var/log/journal/`. The command `journalctl`
allows you to see the contents of the journal. For example,

```ShellSession
$ journalctl -b
```

shows all journal entries since the last reboot. (The output of
`journalctl` is piped into `less` by default.) You can use various
options and match operators to restrict output to messages of interest.
For instance, to get all messages from PostgreSQL:

```ShellSession
$ journalctl -u postgresql.service
-- Logs begin at Mon, 2013-01-07 13:28:01 CET, end at Tue, 2013-01-08 01:09:57 CET. --
...
Jan 07 15:44:14 hagbard postgres[2681]: [2-1] LOG:  database system is shut down
-- Reboot --
Jan 07 15:45:10 hagbard postgres[2532]: [1-1] LOG:  database system was shut down at 2013-01-07 15:44:14 CET
Jan 07 15:45:13 hagbard postgres[2500]: [1-1] LOG:  database system is ready to accept connections
```

Or to get all messages since the last reboot that have at least a
"critical" severity level:

```ShellSession
$ journalctl -b -p crit
Dec 17 21:08:06 mandark sudo[3673]: pam_unix(sudo:auth): auth could not identify password for [alice]
Dec 29 01:30:22 mandark kernel[6131]: [1053513.909444] CPU6: Core temperature above threshold, cpu clock throttled (total events = 1)
```

The system journal is readable by root and by users in the `wheel` and
`systemd-journal` groups. All users have a private journal that can be
read using `journalctl`.

---

# Rebooting and Shutting Down {#sec-rebooting}

The system can be shut down (and automatically powered off) by doing:

```ShellSession
# shutdown
```

This is equivalent to running `systemctl poweroff`.

To reboot the system, run

```ShellSession
# reboot
```

which is equivalent to `systemctl reboot`. Alternatively, you can
quickly reboot the system using `kexec`, which bypasses the BIOS by
directly loading the new kernel into memory:

```ShellSession
# systemctl kexec
```

The machine can be suspended to RAM (if supported) using `systemctl suspend`,
and suspended to disk using `systemctl hibernate`.

These commands can be run by any user who is logged in locally, i.e. on
a virtual console or in X11; otherwise, the user is asked for
authentication.

---

# Rolling Back Configuration Changes {#sec-rollback}

After running `nixos-rebuild` to switch to a new configuration, you may
find that the new configuration doesn't work very well. In that case,
there are several ways to return to a previous configuration.

First, the GRUB boot manager allows you to boot into any previous
configuration that hasn't been garbage-collected. These configurations
can be found under the GRUB submenu "NixOS - All configurations". This
is especially useful if the new configuration fails to boot. After the
system has booted, you can make the selected configuration the default
for subsequent boots:

```ShellSession
# /run/current-system/bin/switch-to-configuration boot
```

Second, you can switch to the previous configuration in a running
system:

```ShellSession
# nixos-rebuild switch --rollback
```

This is equivalent to running:

```ShellSession
# /nix/var/nix/profiles/system-N-link/bin/switch-to-configuration switch
```

where `N` is the number of the NixOS system configuration. To get a
list of the available configurations, do:

```ShellSession
$ ls -l /nix/var/nix/profiles/system-*-link
...
lrwxrwxrwx 1 root root 78 Aug 12 13:54 /nix/var/nix/profiles/system-268-link -> /nix/store/202b...-nixos-13.07pre4932_5a676e4-4be1055
```

---

# Maintenance Mode {#sec-maintenance-mode}

You can enter rescue mode by running:

```ShellSession
# systemctl rescue
```

This will eventually give you a single-user root shell. Systemd will
stop (almost) all system services. To get out of maintenance mode, just
exit from the rescue shell.

---

# User Sessions {#sec-user-sessions}

Systemd keeps track of all users who are logged into the system (e.g. on
a virtual console or remotely via SSH). The command `loginctl` allows
querying and manipulating user sessions. For instance, to list all user
sessions:

```ShellSession
$ loginctl
   SESSION        UID USER             SEAT
        c1        500 eelco            seat0
        c3          0 root             seat0
        c4        500 alice
```

This shows that two users are logged in locally, while another is logged
in remotely. ("Seats" are essentially the combinations of displays and
input devices attached to the system; usually, there is only one seat.)
To get information about a session:

```ShellSession
$ loginctl session-status c3
c3 - root (0)
           Since: Tue, 2013-01-08 01:17:56 CET; 4min 42s ago
          Leader: 2536 (login)
            Seat: seat0; vc3
             TTY: /dev/tty3
         Service: login; type tty; class user
           State: online
          CGroup: name=systemd:/user/root/c3
                  ├─ 2536 /nix/store/10mn4xip9n7y9bxqwnsx7xwx2v2g34xn-shadow-4.1.5.1/bin/login --
                  ├─10339 -bash
                  └─10355 w3m nixos.org
```

This shows that the user is logged in on virtual console 3. It also
lists the processes belonging to this session. Since systemd keeps track
of this, you can terminate a session in a way that ensures that all the
session's processes are gone:

```ShellSession
# loginctl terminate-session c3
```

---

# Control Groups {#sec-cgroups}

To keep track of the processes in a running system, systemd uses
*control groups* (cgroups). A control group is a set of processes used
to allocate resources such as CPU, memory or I/O bandwidth. There can be
multiple control group hierarchies, allowing each kind of resource to be
managed independently.

The command `systemd-cgls` lists all control groups in the `systemd`
hierarchy, which is what systemd uses to keep track of the processes
belonging to each service or user session:

```ShellSession
$ systemd-cgls
├─user
│ └─eelco
│   └─c1
│     ├─ 2567 -:0
│     ├─ 2682 kdeinit4: kdeinit4 Running...
│     ├─ ...
│     └─10851 sh -c less -R
└─system
  ├─httpd.service
  │ ├─2444 httpd -f /nix/store/3pyacby5cpr55a03qwbnndizpciwq161-httpd.conf -DNO_DETACH
  │ └─...
  ├─dhcpcd.service
  │ └─2376 dhcpcd --config /nix/store/f8dif8dsi2yaa70n03xir8r653776ka6-dhcpcd.conf
  └─ ...
```

Similarly, `systemd-cgls cpu` shows the cgroups in the CPU hierarchy,
which allows per-cgroup CPU scheduling priorities. By default, every
systemd service gets its own CPU cgroup, while all user sessions are in
the top-level CPU cgroup. This ensures, for instance, that a thousand
run-away processes in the `httpd.service` cgroup cannot starve the CPU
for one process in the `postgresql.service` cgroup. (By contrast, it
they were in the same cgroup, then the PostgreSQL process would get
1/1001 of the cgroup's CPU time.) You can limit a service's CPU share in
`configuration.nix`:

```nix
{ systemd.services.httpd.serviceConfig.CPUShares = 512; }
```

By default, every cgroup has 1024 CPU shares, so this will halve the CPU
allocation of the `httpd.service` cgroup.

There also is a `memory` hierarchy that controls memory allocation
limits; by default, all processes are in the top-level cgroup, so any
service or session can exhaust all available memory. Per-cgroup memory
limits can be specified in `configuration.nix`; for instance, to limit
`httpd.service` to 512 MiB of RAM (excluding swap):

```nix
{ systemd.services.httpd.serviceConfig.MemoryLimit = "512M"; }
```

The command `systemd-cgtop` shows a continuously updated list of all
cgroups with their CPU and memory usage.

---

# Cleaning the Nix Store {#sec-nix-gc}

Nix has a purely functional model, meaning that packages are never
upgraded in place. Instead new versions of packages end up in a
different location in the Nix store (`/nix/store`). You should
periodically run Nix's *garbage collector* to remove old, unreferenced
packages. This is easy:

```ShellSession
$ nix-collect-garbage
```

Alternatively, you can use a systemd unit that does the same in the
background:

```ShellSession
# systemctl start nix-gc.service
```

You can tell NixOS in `configuration.nix` to run this unit automatically
at certain points in time, for instance, every night at 03:15:

```nix
{
  nix.gc.automatic = true;
  nix.gc.dates = "03:15";
}
```

The commands above do not remove garbage collector roots, such as old
system configurations. Thus they do not remove the ability to roll back
to previous configurations. The following command deletes old roots,
removing the ability to roll back to them:

```ShellSession
$ nix-collect-garbage -d
```

You can also do this for specific profiles, e.g.

```ShellSession
$ nix-env -p /nix/var/nix/profiles/per-user/eelco/profile --delete-generations old
```

Note that NixOS system configurations are stored in the profile
`/nix/var/nix/profiles/system`.

Another way to reclaim disk space (often as much as 40% of the size of
the Nix store) is to run Nix's store optimiser, which seeks out
identical files in the store and replaces them with hard links to a
single copy.

```ShellSession
$ nix-store --optimise
```

Since this command needs to read the entire Nix store, it can take quite
a while to finish.

## NixOS Boot Entries {#sect-nixos-gc-boot-entries}

If your `/boot` partition runs out of space, after clearing old profiles
you must rebuild your system with `nixos-rebuild boot` or `nixos-rebuild
switch` to update the `/boot` partition and clear space.

---

# Troubleshooting {#ch-troubleshooting}

This chapter describes solutions to common problems you might encounter
when you manage your NixOS system.

```{=include=} sections
boot-problems.section.md
maintenance-mode.section.md
rollback.section.md
store-corruption.section.md
network-problems.section.md
```

---

# Boot Problems {#sec-boot-problems}

If NixOS fails to boot, there are a number of kernel command line parameters that may help you to identify or fix the issue. You can add these parameters in the GRUB boot menu by pressing “e” to modify the selected boot entry and editing the line starting with `linux`. The following are some useful kernel command line parameters that are recognised by the NixOS boot scripts or by systemd:

`boot.shell_on_fail`

: Allows the user to start a root shell if something goes wrong in stage 1 of the boot process (the initial ramdisk). This is disabled by default because there is no authentication for the root shell.

`boot.debug1`

: Start an interactive shell in stage 1 before anything useful has been done. That is, no modules have been loaded and no file systems have been mounted, except for `/proc` and `/sys`.

`boot.debug1devices`

: Like `boot.debug1`, but runs stage1 until kernel modules are loaded and device nodes are created. This may help with e.g. making the keyboard work.

`boot.debug1mounts`

: Like `boot.debug1` or `boot.debug1devices`, but runs stage1 until all filesystems that are mounted during initrd are mounted (see [neededForBoot](#opt-fileSystems._name_.neededForBoot)). As a motivating example, this could be useful if you've forgotten to set [neededForBoot](#opt-fileSystems._name_.neededForBoot) on a file system.

`boot.trace`

: Print every shell command executed by the stage 1 and 2 boot scripts.

`single`

: Boot into rescue mode (a.k.a. single user mode). This will cause systemd to start nothing but the unit `rescue.target`, which runs `sulogin` to prompt for the root password and start a root login shell. Exiting the shell causes the system to continue with the normal boot process.

`systemd.log_level=debug` `systemd.log_target=console`

: Make systemd very verbose and send log messages to the console instead of the journal. For more parameters recognised by systemd, see systemd(1).

In addition, these arguments are recognised by the live image only:

`live.nixos.passwd=password`

: Set the password for the `nixos` live user. This can be used for SSH access if there are issues using the terminal.

Notice that for `boot.shell_on_fail`, `boot.debug1`, `boot.debug1devices`, and `boot.debug1mounts`, if you did **not** select "start the new shell as pid 1", and you `exit` from the new shell, boot will proceed normally from the point where it failed, as if you'd chosen "ignore the error and continue".

If no login prompts or X11 login screens appear (e.g. due to hanging dependencies), you can press Alt+ArrowUp. If you’re lucky, this will start rescue mode (described above). (Also note that since most units have a 90-second timeout before systemd gives up on them, the `agetty` login prompts should appear eventually unless something is very wrong.)

---

# Network Problems {#sec-nix-network-issues}

Nix uses a so-called *binary cache* to optimise building a package from
source into downloading it as a pre-built binary. That is, whenever a
command like `nixos-rebuild` needs a path in the Nix store, Nix will try
to download that path from the Internet rather than build it from
source. The default binary cache is `https://cache.nixos.org/`. If this
cache is unreachable, Nix operations may take a long time due to HTTP
connection timeouts. You can disable the use of the binary cache by
adding `--option use-binary-caches false`, e.g.

```ShellSession
# nixos-rebuild switch --option use-binary-caches false
```

If you have an alternative binary cache at your disposal, you can use it
instead:

```ShellSession
# nixos-rebuild switch --option binary-caches http://my-cache.example.org/
```

---

# Nix Store Corruption {#sec-nix-store-corruption}

After a system crash, it's possible for files in the Nix store to become
corrupted. (For instance, the Ext4 file system has the tendency to
replace un-synced files with zero bytes.) NixOS tries hard to prevent
this from happening: it performs a `sync` before switching to a new
configuration, and Nix's database is fully transactional. If corruption
still occurs, you may be able to fix it automatically.

If the corruption is in a path in the closure of the NixOS system
configuration, you can fix it by doing

```ShellSession
# nixos-rebuild switch --repair
```

This will cause Nix to check every path in the closure, and if its
cryptographic hash differs from the hash recorded in Nix's database, the
path is rebuilt or redownloaded.

You can also scan the entire Nix store for corrupt paths:

```ShellSession
# nix-store --verify --check-contents --repair
```

Any corrupt paths will be redownloaded if they're available in a binary
cache; otherwise, they cannot be repaired.

---

