<!-- source: https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/stable/#sec-nixos-tests -->
<!-- repo: NixOS/nixpkgs -->
<!-- auto-generated by scripts/generate-references.sh - DO NOT EDIT MANUALLY -->

# NixOS Tests

# NixOS Tests {#sec-nixos-tests}

When you add some feature to NixOS, you should write a test for it.
NixOS tests are kept in the directory `nixos/tests`, and are executed
(using Nix) by a testing framework that automatically starts one or more
virtual machines containing the NixOS system(s) required for the test.

```{=include=} sections
writing-nixos-tests.section.md
running-nixos-tests.section.md
running-nixos-tests-interactively.section.md
linking-nixos-tests-to-packages.section.md
testing-hardware-features.section.md
```

---

# Writing Tests {#sec-writing-nixos-tests}

A NixOS test is a module that has the following structure:

```nix
{
  # QEMU virtual machines:
  nodes = {
    vm1 =
      { config, pkgs, ... }:
      {
        # ...
      };
    vm2 =
      { config, pkgs, ... }:
      {
        # ...
      };
    # …
  };

  # systemd-nspawn containers:
  containers = {
    container1 =
      { config, pkgs, ... }:
      {
        # ...
      };
    container2 =
      { config, pkgs, ... }:
      {
        # ...
      };
  };

  testScript = ''
    Python code…
  '';
}
```

We refer to the whole test above as a test module, whereas the values
in [`nodes.<name>`](#test-opt-nodes) and [`containers.<name>`](#test-opt-containers)
are NixOS modules themselves.

The option [`testScript`](#test-opt-testScript) is a piece of Python code that executes the
test (described [below](#ssec-test-script)). During the test, it will start one or more
virtual machines and/or `systemd-nspawn` containers, the configuration of which is described by
the options [`nodes`](#test-opt-nodes) and [`containers`](#test-opt-containers), respectively.

An example of a single-node test is
[`login.nix`](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/nixos/tests/login.nix).
It only needs a single machine to test whether users can log in
on the virtual console, whether device ownership is correctly maintained
when switching between consoles, and so on. An interesting multi-node test is
[`nfs/simple.nix`](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/nixos/tests/nfs/simple.nix).
It uses two client nodes to test correct locking across server crashes.

A test can contain both virtual machines and containers.
If configured to share a common VLAN,
they can reach each other over the network.
See [](https://github.com/applicative-systems/nixpkgs/blob/78100f9077ab50604ab9c9514e442bbc7ac7ca5b/nixos/tests/nixos-test-driver/containers.nix)
for an example of this and [](#sec-running-nixos-tests-requirements) for the system requirements for this scenario.

## Calling a test {#sec-calling-nixos-tests}

Tests are invoked differently depending on whether the test is part of NixOS or lives in a different project.

### Testing within NixOS {#sec-call-nixos-test-in-nixos}

Tests that are part of NixOS are added to [`nixos/tests/all-tests.nix`](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/nixos/tests/all-tests.nix).

```nix
{ hostname = runTest ./hostname.nix; }
```

Overrides can be added by defining an anonymous module in `all-tests.nix`.

```nix
{
  hostname = runTest {
    imports = [ ./hostname.nix ];
    defaults.networking.firewall.enable = false;
  };
}
```

You can run a test with attribute name `hostname` in `nixos/tests/all-tests.nix` by invoking:

```shell
cd /my/git/clone/of/nixpkgs
nix-build -A nixosTests.hostname
```

### Testing outside the NixOS project {#sec-call-nixos-test-outside-nixos}

Outside the `nixpkgs` repository, you can use the `runNixOSTest` function from
`pkgs.testers`:

```nix
let
  pkgs = import <nixpkgs> { };

in
pkgs.testers.runNixOSTest {
  imports = [ ./test.nix ];
  defaults.services.foo.package = mypkg;
}
```

`runNixOSTest` returns a derivation that runs the test.

## Test machines {#ssec-nixos-test-machines}

A NixOS test usually consists of one or more test machines. Each machine is either a
QEMU virtual machine or a `systemd-nspawn` container.

QEMU virtual machines are defined in the
[`nodes`](#test-opt-nodes) attribute set, whereas `systemd-nspawn` containers are defined in the
[`containers`](#test-opt-containers) attribute set.

To set NixOS options for all machines in the test, use the attribute
[`defaults`](#test-opt-defaults). These options are applied to both virtual machines
and containers. You can set separate defaults for virtual machines and containers
using the attributes [`nodeDefaults`](#test-opt-nodeDefaults) and
[`containerDefaults`](#test-opt-containerDefaults), respectively.

### Virtual machines vs. containers {#sec-nixos-test-vms-vs-containers}

QEMU virtual machines and `systemd-nspawn` containers offer different
trade-offs which make them suitable for different use cases.

Some advantages of containers over virtual machines are:

- Containers share the kernel of the host system; they are
  significantly faster to start up than virtual machines.
- Containers are more lightweight in terms of resource usage, which
  allows running more of them in parallel on a single host.
- Containers can easily be run in virtualised environments, e.g., CI systems.
- Containers allow direct bind-mounting of host device nodes, which enables
  testing of GPU code (CUDA), for example.

Some advantages of virtual machines over containers are:

- Virtual machines run a separate kernel, which allows testing kernel features
  (kernel modules, etc.).
- Virtual machines support testing graphical applications on X11.
- Virtual machines allow testing NixOS modules that use systemd's namespacing options (such as `ProtectSystem=` or `MountAPIVFS=`).
- Virtual machines allow testing [`spcialisation`](options.html#opt-specialisation).
  (Switching to a specialisation requires the creation of SUID/SGID wrappers, which is disallowed in `systemd-nspawn` within the Nix sandbox.)
- Virtual machines allow the execution of `setuid` binaries.

Refer to the sections on [QEMU virtual machines](#ssec-nixos-test-qemu-vms)
and [systemd-nspawn containers](#ssec-nixos-test-nspawn-containers) below
for more details on configuring each type of machine.

### Configuring test machines {#sec-nixos-test-machines-config}

The following special NixOS option can be used to configure
machines in a NixOS test, whether they are virtual machines or containers:

`virtualisation.vlans`

:   The virtual networks to which the VM is connected. See
    [`nat.nix`](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/nixos/tests/nat.nix)
    for an example.

#### Configuring `systemd-nspawn` containers {#ssec-nixos-test-nspawn-containers}

Some options are specific to `systemd-nspawn` containers:

`virtualisation.systemd-nspawn.options`

:  A list of additional command-line options to pass to
    `systemd-nspawn` when starting the container. For example, to
    bind mount a directory from the host into the container, you could
    use: `[ "--bind=/host/dir:/container/dir" ]`.

For more options, see the module
[`nspawn-container`](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/nixos/modules/virtualisation/nspawn-container/default.nix).

Note that the paths used in `--bind` or `--bind-ro` options have to be accessible from within the Nix sandbox.
Use the Nix option
[`sandbox-paths`](https://nix.dev/manual/nix/stable/command-ref/conf-file#conf-sandbox-paths)
and/or the module [`programs.nix-required-mounts`](#opt-programs.nix-required-mounts.enable) on the host
to add additional paths to the sandbox.

#### Configuring QEMU virtual machines {#ssec-nixos-test-qemu-vms}

Some options are specific to QEMU virtual machines:

`virtualisation.memorySize`

:   The memory of the VM in MiB (1024×1024 bytes).


`virtualisation.writableStore`

:   By default, the Nix store in the VM is not writable. If you enable
    this option, a writable union file system is mounted on top of the
    Nix store to make it appear writable. This is necessary for tests
    that run Nix operations that modify the store.

For more options, see the module
[`qemu-vm.nix`](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/nixos/modules/virtualisation/qemu-vm.nix).

## Writing the test script {#ssec-test-script}

The test script is a sequence of Python statements that perform various
actions, such as starting machines, executing commands in them, and so on. For
example, if you specified a virtual machine in `nodes.machine`, there will be
a Python variable `machine` available in the test script that represents that
virtual machine. The following example would start the machine, wait until it
has finished booting, and then execute a command and check that the output is
more-or-less correct:

```py
machine.start()
machine.wait_for_unit("default.target")
t.assertIn("Linux", machine.succeed("uname"), "Wrong OS")
```

The first line is technically unnecessary; machines are implicitly started
when you first execute an action on them (such as `wait_for_unit` or
`succeed`). If you have multiple machines, you can speed up the test by
starting them in parallel:

```py
start_all()
```

Under the variable `t`, all assertions from [`unittest.TestCase`](https://docs.python.org/3/library/unittest.html) are available.

If the hostname of a machine contains characters that can't be used in a
Python variable name, those characters will be replaced with
underscores in the variable name, so `nodes.machine-a` will be exposed
to Python as `machine_a`.

### Methods available on machine objects {#ssec-machine-objects}

The following methods are available on machine objects (like `machine` in
the examples above):

@PYTHON_MACHINE_METHODS@

### Testing user units {#ssec-testing-user-units}

To test user units declared by `systemd.user.services` the optional
`user` argument can be used:

```py
machine.start()
machine.wait_for_x()
machine.wait_for_unit("xautolock.service", "x-session-user")
```

This applies to `systemctl`, `get_unit_info`, `wait_for_unit`,
`start_job` and `stop_job`.

### Failing tests early {#ssec-failing-tests-early}

To fail tests early when certain invariants are no longer met (instead of waiting for the build to time out), the decorator `polling_condition` is provided. For example, if we are testing a program `foo` that should not quit after being started, we might write the following:

```py
@polling_condition
def foo_running():
    machine.succeed("pgrep -x foo")


machine.succeed("foo --start")
machine.wait_until_succeeds("pgrep -x foo")

with foo_running:
    ...  # Put `foo` through its paces
```

`polling_condition` takes the following (optional) arguments:

`seconds_interval`

:   specifies how often the condition should be polled:

```py
@polling_condition(seconds_interval=10)
def foo_running():
    machine.succeed("pgrep -x foo")
```

`description`

:   is used in the log when the condition is checked. If this is not provided, the description is pulled from the docstring of the function. These two are therefore equivalent:

```py
@polling_condition
def foo_running():
    "check that foo is running"
    machine.succeed("pgrep -x foo")
```

```py
@polling_condition(description="check that foo is running")
def foo_running():
    machine.succeed("pgrep -x foo")
```

### Adding Python packages to the test script {#ssec-python-packages-in-test-script}

When additional Python libraries are required in the test script, they can be
added using the parameter `extraPythonPackages`. For example, you could add
`numpy` like this:

```nix
{
  extraPythonPackages = p: [ p.numpy ];

  nodes = { };

  # Type checking on extra packages doesn't work yet
  skipTypeCheck = true;

  testScript = ''
    import numpy as np
    assert str(np.zeros(4)) == "[0. 0. 0. 0.]"
  '';
}
```

In that case, `numpy` is chosen from the generic `python3Packages`.

### Linting and type checking test scripts {#ssec-test-script-checks}

Test scripts are automatically linted with
[Pyflakes](https://pypi.org/project/pyflakes/) and type-checked with
[Mypy](https://mypy.readthedocs.io/en/stable/).
If there are any linting or type checking errors, the test will
fail to evaluate.

For faster dev cycles it's also possible to disable the code-linters
(this shouldn't be committed though):

```nix
{
  skipLint = true;
  nodes.machine =
    { config, pkgs, ... }:
    {
      # configuration…
    };

  testScript = ''
    Python code…
  '';
}
```

This will produce a Nix warning at evaluation time. To fully disable the
linter, wrap the test script in comment directives to disable the Black
linter directly (again, don't commit this within the Nixpkgs
repository):

```nix
{
  testScript = ''
    # fmt: off
    Python code…
    # fmt: on
  '';
}
```

Similarly, the type checking of test scripts can be disabled in the following
way:

```nix
{
  skipTypeCheck = true;
  nodes.machine =
    { config, pkgs, ... }:
    {
      # configuration…
    };
}
```

## Overriding a test {#sec-override-nixos-test}

The NixOS test framework returns tests with multiple overriding methods.

`overrideTestDerivation` *function*
:   Like applying `overrideAttrs` on the [test](#test-opt-test) derivation.

    This is a convenience for `extend` with an override on the [`rawTestDerivationArg`](#test-opt-rawTestDerivationArg) option.

    *function*
    :   An extension function, e.g. `finalAttrs: prevAttrs: { /* … */ }`, the result of which is passed to [`mkDerivation`](https://nixos.org/manual/nixpkgs/stable/#sec-using-stdenv).
        Just as with `overrideAttrs`, an abbreviated form can be used, e.g. `prevAttrs: { /* … */ }` or even `{ /* … */ }`.
        See [`lib.extends`](https://nixos.org/manual/nixpkgs/stable/#function-library-lib.fixedPoints.extends).

`extendNixOS { module = ` *module* `; specialArgs = ` *specialArgs* `; }`
:   Evaluates the test with additional NixOS modules and/or arguments.

    `module`
    :   A NixOS module to add to all the machines in the test. Sets test option [`extraBaseModules`](#test-opt-extraBaseModules).

    `specialArgs`
    :   An attribute set of arguments to pass to all NixOS modules. These override the existing arguments, as well as any `_module.args.<name>` that the modules may define. Sets test option [`node.specialArgs`](#test-opt-node.specialArgs).

    This is a convenience function for `extend` that overrides the aforementioned test options.

    :::{.example #ex-nixos-test-extendNixOS}

    # Using extendNixOS in `passthru.tests` to make `(openssh.tests.overrideAttrs f).tests.nixos` coherent

    ```nix
    mkDerivation (finalAttrs: {
      # …
      passthru = {
        tests = {
          nixos = nixosTests.openssh.extendNixOS {
            module = {
              services.openssh.package = finalAttrs.finalPackage;
            };
          };
        };
      };
    })
    ```
    :::

`extend { modules = ` *modules* `; specialArgs = ` *specialArgs* `; }`
:   Adds new `nixosTest` modules and/or module arguments to the test, which are evaluated together with the existing modules and [built-in options](#sec-test-options-reference).

    If you're only looking to extend the _NixOS_ configurations of the test, and not something else about the test, you may use the `extendNixOS` convenience function instead.

    `modules`
    :   A list of modules to add to the test. These are added to the existing modules and then [evaluated](https://nixos.org/manual/nixpkgs/stable/index.html#module-system-lib-evalModules) together.

    `specialArgs`
    :   An attribute of arguments to pass to the test. These override the existing arguments, as well as any `_module.args.<name>` that the modules may define. See [`evalModules`/`specialArgs`](https://nixos.org/manual/nixpkgs/stable/#module-system-lib-evalModules-param-specialArgs).

## Test Options Reference {#sec-test-options-reference}

The following options can be used when writing tests.

```{=include=} options
id-prefix: test-opt-
list-id: test-options-list
source: @NIXOS_TEST_OPTIONS_JSON@
```

## Debugging test machines {#sec-test-sandbox-breakpoint}

You can set the [`enableDebugHook`](#test-opt-enableDebugHook) option to pause
a test on the first failure and have it print instructions on how to enter the
sandbox shell of the test. Suppose you have the following test module:

```nix
{
  name = "foo";

  nodes.machine = { };

  enableDebugHook = true;
  sshBackdoor.enable = true;

  testScript = ''
    start_all()
    machine.succeed("false") # this will fail
  '';
}
```

The test will fail with an output like this:

```
vm-test-run-foo> !!! Breakpoint reached, run 'sudo /nix/store/eeeee-attach/bin/attach <PID>'
```

You can then enter the sandbox shell:

```
$ sudo /nix/store/eeeee-attach/bin/attach <PID>
bash#
```

There, you can attach to a [`pdb`](https://docs.python.org/3/library/pdb.html) session
to step through the Python test script:

```
bash# telnet 127.0.0.1 4444
pdb$
```

Note that it is also possible to set breakpoints in the test script using `debug.breakpoint()`.

### SSH access to test VMs {#sec-test-vm-ssh-access}

::: {.note}
For debugging with SSH access into the machines, it's recommended to try using
[the interactive driver](#sec-running-nixos-tests-interactively) with its
[SSH backdoor](#sec-nixos-test-ssh-access) first.

This feature is mostly intended to debug flaky test failures that aren't
reproducible elsewhere.
:::


If you set the [`sshBackdoor.enable`](#test-opt-sshBackdoor.enable) option,
QEMU virtual machines will open an SSH backdoor based on AF_VSOCK
(see [](#sec-nixos-test-ssh-access)).
Once you are in the sandbox shell, you can access the VMs (for example, `machine`)
with SSH over vsock:

```
bash# ssh -F ./ssh_config -o User=root vsock-mux//tmp/.../machine_host.socket
```

The socket paths are printed at the beginning of the test. See
[](#sec-nixos-test-ssh-access) for more context.

### SSH access to test containers {#sec-test-container-ssh-access}

If you set the [`sshBackdoor.enable`](#test-opt-sshBackdoor.enable) option,
each `systemd-nspawn` container will open an SSH backdoor.
Once the container starts,
it will print instructions on how to log into the container via SSH.
If the test fails,
attach to the sandbox as described above,
and then use the provided SSH command to log into the container.
For example:

```
$ sudo /nix/store/eeeee-attach <PID>
bash# ssh -o User=root -o ProxyCommand="socat - UNIX-CLIENT:/run/systemd/nspawn/unix-export/machine/ssh" bash
[root@machine:~]# hostname
machine
```

---

# Running Tests {#sec-running-nixos-tests}

You can run tests using `nix-build`. For example, to run the test
[`login.nix`](https://github.com/NixOS/nixpkgs/blob/master/nixos/tests/login.nix),
you do:

```ShellSession
$ cd /my/git/clone/of/nixpkgs
$ nix-build -A nixosTests.login
```

After building/downloading all required dependencies, this will perform
a build that starts a QEMU/KVM virtual machine containing a NixOS
system. The virtual machine mounts the Nix store of the host; this makes
VM creation very fast, as no disk image needs to be created. Afterwards,
you can view a log of the test:

```ShellSession
$ nix-store --read-log result
```

## System Requirements {#sec-running-nixos-tests-requirements}

NixOS tests using QEMU virtual machine [`nodes`](#test-opt-nodes) require virtualization support.
This means that the machine must have `kvm` in its [system features](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/command-ref/conf-file.html?highlight=system-features#conf-system-features) list, or `apple-virt` in case of macOS.
These features are autodetected locally, but `apple-virt` is only autodetected since Nix 2.19.0.

Features of **remote builders** must additionally be configured manually on the client, e.g. on NixOS with [`nix.buildMachines.*.supportedFeatures`](https://search.nixos.org/options?show=nix.buildMachines.*.supportedFeatures&sort=alpha_asc&query=nix.buildMachines) or through general [Nix configuration](https://nixos.org/manual/nix/stable/advanced-topics/distributed-builds).

If you run the tests on a **macOS** machine, you also need a "remote" builder for Linux; possibly a VM. [nix-darwin](https://daiderd.com/nix-darwin/) users may enable [`nix.linux-builder.enable`](https://daiderd.com/nix-darwin/manual/index.html#opt-nix.linux-builder.enable) to launch such a VM.

NixOS tests using `systemd-nspawn` [`containers`](#test-opt-containers) require the Nix daemon to be
configured with the following settings:

```nix
{
  nix.settings = {
    auto-allocate-uids = true;
    extra-system-features = [ "uid-range" ];
    experimental-features = [
      "auto-allocate-uids"
      "cgroups"
    ];
  };
}
```

See the documentation of the settings
[`auto-allocate-uids`](https://nix.dev/manual/nix/stable/command-ref/conf-file#conf-auto-allocate-uids),
[`uid-range`](https://nix.dev/manual/nix/stable/command-ref/conf-file.html?highlight=uid-range#conf-system-features), and
[`cgroups`](https://nix.dev/manual/nix/stable/development/experimental-features#xp-feature-cgroups)
for more information.

If the test uses both `systemd-nspawn` [`containers`](#test-opt-containers) and QEMU virtual machine [`nodes`](#test-opt-nodes)
and requires them share a common VLAN,
`/dev/net` must be present in the sandbox.
This allows them to be bridged over a TAP interface.
To make this path available, set the following option:

```nix
{
  nix.settings.sandbox-paths = [ "/dev/net" ];
}
```

---

# Running Tests interactively {#sec-running-nixos-tests-interactively}

The test itself can be run interactively. This is particularly useful
when developing or debugging a test:

```ShellSession
$ nix-build . -A nixosTests.login.driverInteractive
$ ./result/bin/nixos-test-driver
[...]
>>>
```

::: {.note}
Tests using `systemd-nspawn` container machines require root privileges to run interactively,
since the driver calls `systemd-nspawn` directly to start the containers:

```
$ sudo ./result/bin/nixos-test-driver
[...]
>>>
```
:::

::: {.note}
By executing the test driver in this way,
the VMs executed may gain network & Internet access via their backdoor control interface,
typically recognized as `eth0`.
:::

You can then take any Python statement, e.g.

```py
>>> start_all()
>>> test_script()
>>> machine.succeed("touch /tmp/foo")
>>> print(machine.succeed("pwd")) # Show stdout of command
```

The function `test_script` executes the entire test script and drops you
back into the test driver command line upon its completion. This allows
you to inspect the state of the VMs after the test (e.g. to debug the
test script).

## Shell access to VMs in interactive mode {#sec-nixos-test-shell-access}

The function `<yourmachine>.shell_interact()` grants access to a shell running
inside a virtual machine. To use it, replace `<yourmachine>` with the name of a
virtual machine defined in the test, for example: `machine.shell_interact()`.
Keep in mind that this shell may not display everything correctly as it is
running within an interactive Python REPL, and logging output from the virtual
machine may overwrite input and output from the guest shell:

```py
>>> machine.shell_interact()
machine: Terminal is ready (there is no initial prompt):
$ hostname
machine
```

As an alternative, you can proxy the guest shell to a local TCP server by first
starting a TCP server in a terminal using the command:

```ShellSession
$ socat 'READLINE,PROMPT=$ ' tcp-listen:4444,reuseaddr
```

In the terminal where the test driver is running, connect to this server by
using:

```py
>>> machine.shell_interact("tcp:127.0.0.1:4444")
```

Once the connection is established, you can enter commands in the socat terminal
where socat is running.

## SSH Access for test VMs {#sec-nixos-test-ssh-access}

An SSH-based backdoor to log into machines can be enabled with

```nix
{
  name = "…";
  nodes.machines = {
    # …
  };
  interactive.sshBackdoor.enable = true;
}
```

This creates a [vsock socket](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man7/vsock.7.html)
for each VM to log in with SSH. This configures root login with an empty password.

On the host-side a UNIX domain-socket is used with
[vhost-device-vsock](https://github.com/rust-vmm/vhost-device/blob/main/vhost-device-vsock/README.md).
That way, it's not necessary to assign system-wide unique vsock numbers.

```
$ ssh vsock-mux//tmp/path/to/host -o User=root
```

The socket paths are printed when starting the test driver:

```
Note: this requires systemd-ssh-proxy(1) to be enabled (default on NixOS 25.05 and newer).
    machine:  ssh -o User=root vsock-mux//tmp/tmpg1rp9nti/machine_host.socket
```

On non-NixOS systems you'll probably need to enable
the SSH config from {manpage}`systemd-ssh-proxy(1)` yourself.

During a test-run, it's possible to print the SSH commands again by running

```
In [2]: dump_machine_ssh()
SSH backdoor enabled, the machines can be accessed like this:
Note: this requires systemd-ssh-proxy(1) to be enabled (default on NixOS 25.05 and newer).
    machine:  ssh -o User=root vsock-mux//tmp/tmpg1rp9nti/machine_host.socket
```

## Port forwarding to NixOS test VMs {#sec-nixos-test-port-forwarding}

If your test has only a single VM, you may use e.g.

```ShellSession
$ QEMU_NET_OPTS="hostfwd=tcp:127.0.0.1:2222-:22" ./result/bin/nixos-test-driver
```

to port-forward a port in the VM (here `22`) to the host machine (here port `2222`).

This naturally does not work when multiple machines are involved,
since a single port on the host cannot forward to multiple VMs.

If the test defines multiple machines, you may opt to _temporarily_ set
`virtualisation.forwardPorts` in the test definition for debugging.

Such port forwardings connect via the VM's virtual network interface.
Thus they cannot connect to ports that are only bound to the VM's
loopback interface (`127.0.0.1`), and the VM's NixOS firewall
must be configured to allow these connections.

## Reuse VM state {#sec-nixos-test-reuse-vm-state}

You can re-use the VM states coming from a previous run by setting the
`--keep-machine-state` flag.

```ShellSession
$ ./result/bin/nixos-test-driver --keep-machine-state
```

The machine state is stored in the `$TMPDIR/vm-state-machinename`
directory.

## Interactive-only test configuration {#sec-nixos-test-interactive-configuration}

The `.driverInteractive` attribute combines the regular test configuration with
definitions from the [`interactive` submodule](#test-opt-interactive). This gives you
a more usable, graphical, but slightly different configuration.

You can add your own interactive-only test configuration by adding extra
configuration to the [`interactive` submodule](#test-opt-interactive).

To interactively run only the regular configuration, build the `<test>.driver` attribute
instead, and call it with the flag `result/bin/nixos-test-driver --interactive`.

---

