<!-- source: https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/stable/#ch-containers -->
<!-- repo: NixOS/nixpkgs -->
<!-- auto-generated by scripts/generate-references.sh - DO NOT EDIT MANUALLY -->

# NixOS Containers

# Container Management {#ch-containers}

NixOS allows you to easily run other NixOS instances as *containers*.
Containers are a light-weight approach to virtualisation that runs
software in the container at the same speed as in the host system. NixOS
containers share the Nix store of the host, making container creation
very efficient.

::: {.warning}
Currently, NixOS containers are not perfectly isolated from the host
system. This means that a user with root access to the container can do
things that affect the host. So you should not give container root
access to untrusted users.
:::

NixOS containers can be created in two ways: imperatively, using the
command `nixos-container`, and declaratively, by specifying them in your
`configuration.nix`. The declarative approach implies that containers
get upgraded along with your host system when you run `nixos-rebuild`,
which is often not what you want. By contrast, in the imperative
approach, containers are configured and updated independently from the
host system.

```{=include=} sections
imperative-containers.section.md
declarative-containers.section.md
container-networking.section.md
```

---

# Declarative Container Specification {#sec-declarative-containers}

You can also specify containers and their configuration in the host's
`configuration.nix`. For example, the following specifies that there
shall be a container named `database` running PostgreSQL:

```nix
{
  containers.database = {
    config =
      { config, pkgs, ... }:
      {
        services.postgresql.enable = true;
        services.postgresql.package = pkgs.postgresql_14;
      };
  };
}
```

If you run `nixos-rebuild switch`, the container will be built. If the
container was already running, it will be updated in place, without
rebooting. The container can be configured to start automatically by
setting `containers.database.autoStart = true` in its configuration.

By default, declarative containers share the network namespace of the
host, meaning that they can listen on (privileged) ports. However, they
cannot change the network configuration. You can give a container its
own network as follows:

```nix
{
  containers.database = {
    privateNetwork = true;
    hostAddress = "192.168.100.10";
    localAddress = "192.168.100.11";
  };
}
```

This gives the container a private virtual Ethernet interface with IP
address `192.168.100.11`, which is hooked up to a virtual Ethernet
interface on the host with IP address `192.168.100.10`. (See the next
section for details on container networking.)

To disable the container, just remove it from `configuration.nix` and
run `nixos-rebuild
  switch`. Note that this will not delete the root directory of the
container in `/var/lib/nixos-containers`. Containers can be destroyed using
the imperative method: `nixos-container destroy foo`.

Declarative containers can be started and stopped using the
corresponding systemd service, e.g.
`systemctl start container@database`.

---

# Imperative Container Management {#sec-imperative-containers}

We'll cover imperative container management using `nixos-container`
first. Be aware that container management is currently only possible as
`root`, and that you need to enable [](#opt-boot.enableContainers) explicitly.

You create a container with identifier `foo` as follows:

```ShellSession
# nixos-container create foo
```

This creates the container's root directory in `/var/lib/nixos-containers/foo`
and a small configuration file in `/etc/nixos-containers/foo.conf`. It also
builds the container's initial system configuration and stores it in
`/nix/var/nix/profiles/per-container/foo/system`. You can modify the
initial configuration of the container on the command line. For
instance, to create a container that has `sshd` running, with the given
public key for `root`:

```ShellSession
# nixos-container create foo --config '
  services.openssh.enable = true;
  users.users.root.openssh.authorizedKeys.keys = ["ssh-dss AAAAB3N…"];
'
```

By default the next free address in the `10.233.0.0/16` subnet will be
chosen as container IP. This behavior can be altered by setting
`--host-address` and `--local-address`:

```ShellSession
# nixos-container create test --config-file test-container.nix \
    --local-address 10.235.1.2 --host-address 10.235.1.1
```

Creating a container does not start it. To start the container, run:

```ShellSession
# nixos-container start foo
```

This command will return as soon as the container has booted and has
reached `multi-user.target`. On the host, the container runs within a
systemd unit called `container@container-name.service`. Thus, if
something went wrong, you can get status info using `systemctl`:

```ShellSession
# systemctl status container@foo
```

If the container has started successfully, you can log in as root using
the `root-login` operation:

```ShellSession
# nixos-container root-login foo
[root@foo:~]#
```

Note that only root on the host can do this (since there is no
authentication). You can also get a regular login prompt using the
`login` operation, which is available to all users on the host:

```ShellSession
# nixos-container login foo
foo login: alice
Password: ***
```

With `nixos-container run`, you can execute arbitrary commands in the
container:

```ShellSession
# nixos-container run foo -- uname -a
Linux foo 3.4.82 #1-NixOS SMP Thu Mar 20 14:44:05 UTC 2014 x86_64 GNU/Linux
```

There are several ways to change the configuration of the container.
First, on the host, you can edit
`/var/lib/nixos-containers/foo/etc/nixos/configuration.nix`, and run

```ShellSession
# nixos-container update foo
```

This will build and activate the new configuration. You can also specify
a new configuration on the command line:

```ShellSession
# nixos-container update foo --config '
  services.httpd.enable = true;
  services.httpd.adminAddr = "foo@example.org";
  networking.firewall.allowedTCPPorts = [ 80 ];
'

# curl http://$(nixos-container show-ip foo)/
<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD HTML 3.2 Final//EN">…
```

However, note that this will overwrite the container's
`/etc/nixos/configuration.nix`.

Alternatively, you can change the configuration from within the
container itself by running `nixos-rebuild switch` inside the container.
Note that the container by default does not have a copy of the NixOS
channel, so you should run `nix-channel --update` first.

Containers can be stopped and started using `nixos-container
  stop` and `nixos-container start`, respectively, or by using
`systemctl` on the container's service unit. To destroy a container,
including its file system, do

```ShellSession
# nixos-container destroy foo
```

---

# Container Networking {#sec-container-networking}

When you create a container using `nixos-container create`, it gets it
own private IPv4 address in the range `10.233.0.0/16`. You can get the
container's IPv4 address as follows:

```ShellSession
# nixos-container show-ip foo
10.233.4.2

$ ping -c1 10.233.4.2
64 bytes from 10.233.4.2: icmp_seq=1 ttl=64 time=0.106 ms
```

Networking is implemented using a pair of virtual Ethernet devices. The
network interface in the container is called `eth0`, while the matching
interface in the host is called `ve-container-name` (e.g., `ve-foo`).
The container has its own network namespace and the `CAP_NET_ADMIN`
capability, so it can perform arbitrary network configuration such as
setting up firewall rules, without affecting or having access to the
host's network.

By default, containers cannot talk to the outside network. If you want
that, you should set up Network Address Translation (NAT) rules on the
host to rewrite container traffic to use your external IP address. This
can be accomplished using the following configuration on the host:

```nix
{
  networking.nat.enable = true;
  networking.nat.internalInterfaces = [ "ve-+" ];
  networking.nat.externalInterface = "eth0";
}
```

where `eth0` should be replaced with the desired external interface.
Note that `ve-+` is a wildcard that matches all container interfaces.

If you are using Network Manager, you need to explicitly prevent it from
managing container interfaces:

```nix
{ networking.networkmanager.unmanaged = [ "interface-name:ve-*" ]; }
```

You may need to restart your system for the changes to take effect.

---

