<!-- source: https://nixos.org/manual/nixos/stable/#sec-configuration-syntax -->
<!-- repo: NixOS/nixpkgs -->
<!-- auto-generated by scripts/generate-references.sh - DO NOT EDIT MANUALLY -->

# NixOS Configuration Syntax

# Configuration Syntax {#sec-configuration-syntax}

The NixOS configuration file `/etc/nixos/configuration.nix` is actually
a *Nix expression*, which is the Nix package manager's purely functional
language for describing how to build packages and configurations. This
means you have all the expressive power of that language at your
disposal, including the ability to abstract over common patterns, which
is very useful when managing complex systems. The syntax and semantics
of the Nix language are fully described in the [Nix
manual](https://nixos.org/nix/manual/#chap-writing-nix-expressions), but
here we give a short overview of the most important constructs useful in
NixOS configuration files.

```{=include=} sections
config-file.section.md
abstractions.section.md
modularity.section.md
```

---

# NixOS Configuration File {#sec-configuration-file}

The NixOS configuration file generally looks like this:

```nix
{ config, pkgs, ... }:

{
  # option definitions
}
```

The first line (`{ config, pkgs, ... }:`) denotes that this is actually
a function that takes at least the two arguments `config` and `pkgs`.
(These are explained later, in chapter [](#sec-writing-modules)) The
function returns a *set* of option definitions (`{ ... }`).
These definitions have the form `name = value`, where `name` is the
name of an option and `value` is its value. For example,

```nix
{ config, pkgs, ... }:

{
  services.httpd.enable = true;
  services.httpd.adminAddr = "alice@example.org";
  services.httpd.virtualHosts.localhost.documentRoot = "/webroot";
}
```

defines a configuration with three option definitions that together
enable the Apache HTTP Server with `/webroot` as the document root.

Sets can be nested, and in fact dots in option names are shorthand for
defining a set containing another set. For instance,
[](#opt-services.httpd.enable) defines a set named
`services` that contains a set named `httpd`, which in turn contains an
option definition named `enable` with value `true`. This means that the
example above can also be written as:

```nix
{ config, pkgs, ... }:

{
  services = {
    httpd = {
      enable = true;
      adminAddr = "alice@example.org";
      virtualHosts = {
        localhost = {
          documentRoot = "/webroot";
        };
      };
    };
  };
}
```

which may be more convenient if you have lots of option definitions that
share the same prefix (such as `services.httpd`).

NixOS checks your option definitions for correctness. For instance, if
you try to define an option that doesn't exist (that is, doesn't have a
corresponding *option declaration*), `nixos-rebuild` will give an error
like:

```plain
The option `services.httpd.enable' defined in `/etc/nixos/configuration.nix' does not exist.
```

Likewise, values in option definitions must have a correct type. For
instance, `services.httpd.enable` must be a Boolean (`true` or `false`).
Trying to give it a value of another type, such as a string, will cause
an error:

```plain
The option value `services.httpd.enable' in `/etc/nixos/configuration.nix' is not a boolean.
```

Options have various types of values. The most important are:

Strings

:   Strings are enclosed in double quotes, e.g.

    ```nix
    {
      networking.hostName = "dexter";
    }
    ```

    Special characters can be escaped by prefixing them with a backslash
    (e.g. `\"`).

    Multi-line strings can be enclosed in *double single quotes*, e.g.

    ```nix
    {
      networking.extraHosts =
        ''
          127.0.0.2 other-localhost
          10.0.0.1 server
        '';
    }
    ```

    The main difference is that it strips from each line a number of
    spaces equal to the minimal indentation of the string as a whole
    (disregarding the indentation of empty lines), and that characters
    like `"` and `\` are not special (making it more convenient for
    including things like shell code). See more info about this in the
    Nix manual [here](https://nixos.org/nix/manual/#ssec-values).

Booleans

:   These can be `true` or `false`, e.g.

    ```nix
    {
      networking.firewall.enable = true;
      networking.firewall.allowPing = false;
    }
    ```

Integers

:   For example,

    ```nix
    {
      boot.kernel.sysctl."net.ipv4.tcp_keepalive_time" = 60;
    }
    ```

    (Note that here the attribute name `net.ipv4.tcp_keepalive_time` is
    enclosed in quotes to prevent it from being interpreted as a set
    named `net` containing a set named `ipv4`, and so on. This is
    because it's not a NixOS option but the literal name of a Linux
    kernel setting.)

Sets

:   Sets were introduced above. They are name/value pairs enclosed in
    braces, as in the option definition

    ```nix
    {
      fileSystems."/boot" =
        { device = "/dev/sda1";
          fsType = "ext4";
          options = [ "rw" "data=ordered" "relatime" ];
        };
    }
    ```

Lists

:   The important thing to note about lists is that list elements are
    separated by whitespace, like this:

    ```nix
    {
      boot.kernelModules = [ "fuse" "kvm-intel" "coretemp" ];
    }
    ```

    List elements can be any other type, e.g. sets:

    ```nix
    {
      swapDevices = [ { device = "/dev/disk/by-label/swap"; } ];
    }
    ```

Packages

:   Usually, the packages you need are already part of the Nix Packages
    collection, which is a set that can be accessed through the function
    argument `pkgs`. Typical uses:

    ```nix
    {
      environment.systemPackages =
        [ pkgs.thunderbird
          pkgs.emacs
        ];

      services.postgresql.package = pkgs.postgresql_14;
    }
    ```

    The latter option definition changes the default PostgreSQL package
    used by NixOS's PostgreSQL service to 14.x. For more information on
    packages, including how to add new ones, see
    [](#sec-custom-packages).

---

# Abstractions {#sec-module-abstractions}

If you find yourself repeating yourself over and over, it’s time to abstract. Take, for instance, this Apache HTTP Server configuration:

```nix
{
  services.httpd.virtualHosts = {
    "blog.example.org" = {
      documentRoot = "/webroot/blog.example.org";
      adminAddr = "alice@example.org";
      forceSSL = true;
      enableACME = true;
    };
    "wiki.example.org" = {
      documentRoot = "/webroot/wiki.example.org";
      adminAddr = "alice@example.org";
      forceSSL = true;
      enableACME = true;
    };
  };
}
```

It defines two virtual hosts with nearly identical configuration; the only difference is the document root directories. To prevent this duplication, we can use a `let`:
```nix
let
  commonConfig = {
    adminAddr = "alice@example.org";
    forceSSL = true;
    enableACME = true;
  };
in
{
  services.httpd.virtualHosts = {
    "blog.example.org" = (commonConfig // { documentRoot = "/webroot/blog.example.org"; });
    "wiki.example.org" = (commonConfig // { documentRoot = "/webroot/wiki.example.org"; });
  };
}
```

The `let commonConfig = ...` defines a variable named `commonConfig`. The `//` operator merges two attribute sets, so the configuration of the second virtual host is the set `commonConfig` extended with the document root option.

You can write a `let` wherever an expression is allowed. Thus, you also could have written:

```nix
{
  services.httpd.virtualHosts =
    let
      commonConfig = {
        # ...
      };
    in
    {
      "blog.example.org" = (
        commonConfig
        // {
          # ...
        }
      );
      "wiki.example.org" = (
        commonConfig
        // {
          # ...
        }
      );
    };
}
```

but not `{ let commonConfig = ...; in ...; }` since attributes (as opposed to attribute values) are not expressions.

**Functions** provide another method of abstraction. For instance, suppose that we want to generate lots of different virtual hosts, all with identical configuration except for the document root. This can be done as follows:

```nix
{
  services.httpd.virtualHosts =
    let
      makeVirtualHost = webroot: {
        documentRoot = webroot;
        adminAddr = "alice@example.org";
        forceSSL = true;
        enableACME = true;
      };
    in
    {
      "example.org" = (makeVirtualHost "/webroot/example.org");
      "example.com" = (makeVirtualHost "/webroot/example.com");
      "example.gov" = (makeVirtualHost "/webroot/example.gov");
      "example.nl" = (makeVirtualHost "/webroot/example.nl");
    };
}
```

Here, `makeVirtualHost` is a function that takes a single argument `webroot` and returns the configuration for a virtual host. That function is then called for several names to produce the list of virtual host configurations.

---

# Modularity {#sec-modularity}

The NixOS configuration mechanism is modular. If your
`configuration.nix` becomes too big, you can split it into multiple
files. Likewise, if you have multiple NixOS configurations (e.g. for
different computers) with some commonality, you can move the common
configuration into a shared file.

Modules have exactly the same syntax as `configuration.nix`. In fact,
`configuration.nix` is itself a module. You can use other modules by
including them from `configuration.nix`, e.g.:

```nix
{ config, pkgs, ... }:

{
  imports = [
    ./vpn.nix
    ./kde.nix
  ];
  services.httpd.enable = true;
  environment.systemPackages = [ pkgs.emacs ];
  # ...
}
```

Here, we include two modules from the same directory, `vpn.nix` and
`kde.nix`. The latter might look like this:

```nix
{ config, pkgs, ... }:

{
  services.xserver.enable = true;
  services.displayManager.sddm.enable = true;
  services.desktopManager.plasma6.enable = true;
  environment.systemPackages = [ pkgs.vim ];
}
```

Note that both `configuration.nix` and `kde.nix` define the option
[](#opt-environment.systemPackages). When multiple modules define an
option, NixOS will try to *merge* the definitions. In the case of
[](#opt-environment.systemPackages) the lists of packages will be
concatenated. The value in `configuration.nix` is
merged last, so for list-type options, it will appear at the end of the
merged list. If you want it to appear first, you can use `mkBefore`:

```nix
{ boot.kernelModules = mkBefore [ "kvm-intel" ]; }
```

This causes the `kvm-intel` kernel module to be loaded before any other
kernel modules.

For other types of options, a merge may not be possible. For instance,
if two modules define [](#opt-services.httpd.adminAddr),
`nixos-rebuild` will give an error:

```plain
The unique option `services.httpd.adminAddr' is defined multiple times, in `/etc/nixos/httpd.nix' and `/etc/nixos/configuration.nix'.
```

When that happens, it's possible to force one definition take precedence
over the others:

```nix
{ services.httpd.adminAddr = pkgs.lib.mkForce "bob@example.org"; }
```

When using multiple modules, you may need to access configuration values
defined in other modules. This is what the `config` function argument is
for: it contains the complete, merged system configuration. That is,
`config` is the result of combining the configurations returned by every
module. (If you're wondering how it's possible that the (indirect) *result*
of a function is passed as an *input* to that same function: that's
because Nix is a "lazy" language --- it only computes values when
they are needed. This works as long as no individual configuration
value depends on itself.)

For example, here is a module that adds some packages to
[](#opt-environment.systemPackages) only if
[](#opt-services.xserver.enable) is set to `true` somewhere else:

```nix
{ config, pkgs, ... }:

{
  environment.systemPackages =
    if config.services.xserver.enable then
      [
        pkgs.firefox
        pkgs.thunderbird
      ]
    else
      [ ];
}
```

With multiple modules, it may not be obvious what the final value of a
configuration option is. The command `nixos-option` allows you to find
out:

```ShellSession
$ nixos-option services.xserver.enable
true

$ nixos-option boot.kernelModules
[ "tun" "ipv6" "loop" ... ]
```

Interactive exploration of the configuration is possible using `nix
  repl`, a read-eval-print loop for Nix expressions. A typical use:

```ShellSession
$ nix repl -f '<nixpkgs/nixos>'

nix-repl> config.networking.hostName
"mandark"

nix-repl> map (x: x.hostName) config.services.httpd.virtualHosts
[ "example.org" "example.gov" ]
```

While abstracting your configuration, you may find it useful to generate
modules using code, instead of writing files. The example below would
have the same effect as importing a file which sets those options.

```nix
{ config, pkgs, ... }:

let
  netConfig = hostName: {
    networking.hostName = hostName;
    networking.useDHCP = false;
  };

in
{
  imports = [ (netConfig "nixos.localdomain") ];
}
```

---

